496

Asian Pac J Trop Biomed 2013; 3(6): 496-500

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apjtb

Document heading            doi:                                                      襃 2013 by the Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine. All rights reserved.
Outbreaks of salmonellosis in three different poultry farms of Kerala, 
India 
Ramachandranpillai Rajagopal, Mangattumuruppel Mini*
Department of Veterinary Microbiology, College of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Mannuthy, Thrissur, Kerala, India, 689521

PEER REVIEW                            ABSTRACT

Peer reviewer
Ranjith Ramanathan, PhD, Assistant 
Professor, Meat Science Department 
of Animal Science, Oklahoma State 
University, 104B ANSI, Stillwater, OK 
74078, USA
Tel: 405 744 9260
Fax: 405 744 4716
Email: ranjith.ramanathan@gmail.com
Comments
This is a good study of three outbreaks 
of Avian salmonellosis in which the 
authors isolated/characterized the 
causative agent and compared their 
antibiogram profile. The results are 
significant in terms of antibiotic 
resistance profile which will prove 
useful in future outbreak cases. 
Details on Page 500

Avian salmonellosis is an important disease causing serious impediment to the development 
of poultry industry especially in developing countries of Asia and Africa. Since no “effective” 
immunoprophylactic measures are available for the disease till date, strict biosecurity is the 
only alternative to preclude the disease. For formulating the control measures, an understanding 
of the epidemiology of the disease, proper diagnosis and identification of the causative agent 
is quintessential. This report sheds light on three different outbreaks of salmonellosis in three 
different farms in Kerala (India) describing the disease diagnosis, antibiotic resistance and the 
suggested control measures. All the three isolates were revealed to be Salmonella gallinarum and 
were resistant to at least three of the antimicrobial agents tested.

1. Introduction
   Salmonellosis caused by Salmonella sp., a Gram negative 
bacterium, is an important disease of chicken all over the 
world. Avian host specific salmonellae include Salmonella 
gallinarum (S. gallinarum) and Salmonella pullorum (S. 
pullorum) which causes fowl typhoid and pullorum disease 
    *Corresponding author: Dr. Mangattumuruppel Mini, Professor and Head, Department 
of Veterinary Microbiology, College of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Mannuhty, 
Thrissur, Kerala, India, 689 521. 
      Tel: +919446030361
      E-mail: mmini@yahoomail.co.in.

respectively. Though they do not have zoonotic potential 
like Salmonella typhimurium or Salmonella enteritidis, they 
can cause severe mortality among chicken resulting in huge 
economic loss. Although, Indian poultry industry is evolving 
and emerging as the world’s second largest market, fowl 
salmonellosis is increasingly rampant if not endemic, 
with a huge bearing on the economy as well as the future 
Article history:
Received 15 Apr 2013
Received in revised form 25 Apr, 2nd revised form 9 May, 3rd revised form 16 May 2013
Accepted 20 May 2013
Available online 28 June 2013

Ramachandranpillai Rajagopal and Mangattumuruppel Mini/Asian Pac J Trop Biomed 2013; 3(6): 496-500

development of poultry sector.
   From 1996 to 2008, typhoid was diagnosed several times in 
India but pullorum disease was reported only once during 
2002[1]. Kumar et al. reported that out of 4672 isolates from 
different parts of India, 118 (6.5%) were S. gallinarum[2]. 
There are relatively less number of reports of salmonellosis 
from India despite its very high prevalence, which can 
be attributed to limited diagnostic facilities under field 
conditions and underreporting.
   This report deals with three outbreaks of salmonellosis in 
three different Government owned poultry farms of Kerala 
State, India, viz., Regional Poultry Farm in Mundayad, 
Central Hatchery in Chengannur and University Poultry 
Farm in Mannuthy.

2. Case report

2.1 History and clinical signs
   The first outbreak occurred in the Regional Poultry 
Farm, Mundayad. Two live grower birds were presented to 
Department of Veterinary Microbiology, College of Veterinary 
and Animal Sciences, Mannuthy, Kerala, India during 
September 2005. The symptoms reported were drooping, 
reduced feed intake and death of grower birds. The second 
outbreak also took place during September 2005 at Central 
Hatchery, Chengannur. The authorities reported severe 
mortality among newly hatched chicks. Signs reported 
include reduced feed intake, ruffled feathers and diarrhoea. 
A few dead chicks of 5-6 days of age were presented for 
investigation. A third case was reported from Revolving 
Fund Hatchery at University Poultry Farm, College of 
Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Mannuthy during October 
2005. It was reported that the day old chicks are weak and 
dying immediately after hatching along with an increased 
incidence of dead in shell. Two dead chicks were presented 
for bacteriological examination.
2.2 Isolation of the causative agent 
   Post mortem examination was performed under aseptic 
conditions and organ samples from liver, spleen, gall 
bladder and heart blood were collected. The isolation of the 
causative agent was done using standard bacteriological 
methods with special emphasis on Salmonella[3]. The organ 
samples collected during post mortem examination were 
streaked onto brain heart infusion agar (BHIA) and to Mac 
Conkey lactose agar (MLA) (Himedia, Mumbai, India) for 
primary isolation. The gall bladder was gently cut using a 
flame sterilized scissors and the content was collected using 
a sterile cotton swab which was subsequently swabbed onto 
the surface of agars.
   Intestinal contents were inoculated into 10 mL of buffered 
peptone water as pre-enrichment for Salmonella. A small 

497
portion of intestine (tied up on both ends with sterile cotton 
thread so that the contents will not leak out) was cut using 
sterile scissors and then immersed the tissue into buffered 
peptone water. Subsequent to an incubation period of 12 
h at 37 °C, about 0.1 mL of the pre-enrichment broth was 
transferred to 10 mL of selective broth viz., Rappaport-
Vassiliadis broth (Himedia, Mumbai, India) and it was then 
incubated at 42°C for 48 h. Following the incubation period, 
a loopful of inoculum was transferred to MLA; incubated for 
24 h under aerobic condition in a bacteriological incubator 
(Cole-Parmer, India). 
   In the case of Mundayad birds, the post mortem revealed 
slight necrosis of liver and no other gross lesions. Soiled 
vent and liver necrosis were observed in case of birds from 
Chengannur. Birds from Mannuthy farm revealed necrosis of 
liver, air sacculitis, peritonitis and unabsorbed yolk.
   Bacteriological culture from all the three cases revealed 
round translucent smooth convex colonies on BHIA after 
24 h from spleen and liver. Yellow colonies were obtained 
on Mc Conkey agar which were suggestive of Salmonella 
sp. Pre-enrichment broth culture of intestinal contents 
on (brilliant green agar ) BGA revealed pink colonies with 
pink colouration of the surrounding media as well and 
some green colonies which revealed to be Escherichia coli. 
Gram staining of a single pink colony from BGA and BHIA 
revealed small Gram negative bacteria arranged singly or 
in pairs. The pure cultures of the isolates were stored in 
nutrient agar slants at 4 °C, until further characterization. For 
convenience, the isolates were named after the places from 
where they originated and were designated as Mundayad 
isolate (Mund 1), Chengannur isolate (Cgnr 1) and Mannuthy 
isolate (Mthy 1). 
2.3 Biotyping
   Biochemical identification was done as described by OIE 
Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial 
Animals, Volume 1[3]. Briefly, the tests employed were 
catalase, oxidase, O/F test, motility test using motility 
medium, tripple sugar iron agar (TSI), urease, nitrate 
reduction, indole, methyl red, Voges Proskauer, citrate 
(IMVC), ornithine decarboxylase (ODB), lysine decarboxylase, 
growth on BGA, growth on MLA agar and various sugar 
fermentation tests. All the media used were procured from 
M/s Himedia (Mumbai, India).
   The biochemical characterization revealed similar 
reactions for all three strains excepting the sugar reactions 
which were slightly varied for some sugars. All the three 
isolates were catalase negative, oxidase positive, O/F 
test fermentative, motility negative, TSI reaction showing 
alkaline slant, acid butt with black colouration due to 
production of hydrogen sulphide, urease negative, nitrate 
reduction positive, indole negative, methyl red positive, 
Voges Proskauer negative, Simmond’s citrate positive 
(IMVC reaction pattern as - + - +), pink coloured colonies 

Ramachandranpillai Rajagopal and Mangattumuruppel Mini/Asian Pac J Trop Biomed 2013; 3(6): 496-500 

Alkaline slant, acid butt

Alkaline slant, acid butt

Alkaline slant, acid butt

Yellow colonies
Opaque Pink colonies

Gram negative 
Singly or in pairs
Negative
Positive
Negative
Negative
Negative
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
Negative
Positive
Negative
Negative
Positive

498
Table1
Biochemical reactions of the Salmonella isolates.
Test 
Mund 1
Gram Staining
Arrangement 
Oxidase
Catalase 
Motility
O/F
ODB
Lysine decarboxylase
Urease 
TSI 
H2S production
Gas production
Indole
MR
VP 
Citrate 
Nitrate Reduction 
MLA
BGA
Sugar utilization
a) Lactose
b) Maltose
c) Fructose
d) Sucrose
e) Dextrose
f) Galactose
g) Trehalose
h) Adonitol
i) Xylose
j) Mannitol
k) Dulcitol
l) Inocitol
m) Mannose
n) Salicin
o) Arabinose
p) Raffinose
Biotype
* ND denotes not done.
on BGA and yellow coloured colonies on MLA. The entire 
biochemical reactions for the isolates are presented in Table 
1.  
2.4 Antibiotic sensitivity testing 
   Antibiotic sensitivity testing was done using disc 
diffusion technique[4]. The following antibiotic discs are 
used: ciprofloxacin (10 µg), ampicillin (30 µg), gentamicin 
(10  µg), chloramphenicol (30  µg), ceftriaxone (30  µg), 

Negative
Positive
Positive
Negative
Positive
Positive
Positive
Negative
Positive
Positive
Positive  
Negative
Positive
Negative
Negative
Negative
S. gallinarum

Cgnr 1

Results
Gram negative 
Singly or in pairs
Negative
Positive
Negative
Fermentative
Negative
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
Negative
Positive
Negative
Negative
Positive

Mthy 1

Gram negative 
Singly or in pairs
Negative
Positive
Negative
Fermentative
Positive
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
Negative
Positive
Negative
Negative
Positive

Yellow  colonies
Opaque Pink colonies

Yellow colonies
Opaque Pink colonies

Negative
Positive
Positive
Negative
ND
Positive
Positive
Negative
Positive
Positive
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
Negative
Positive
S. gallinarum

Negative
Positive
Positive
Negative
Positive
Positive
Positive
Negative
Positive
Positive
Positive
ND*
ND
ND
ND
ND

S. gallinarum

oxytetracycline (30 µg), cotrimoxazole (25 µg), streptomycin 
(10 µg), cloxacillin (10 µg), benzyl penicillin (10 IU) and 
erythromycin (15 µg). All the antibiotic discs were procured 
from M/s Himedia (Mumbai, India). The growth inhibition 
zones were measured and the degree of sensitivity 
was interpreted using National Committee for Clinical 
Laboratory Standards (1990) chart, provided along with the 
antibiotic discs.
   In vitro antibiotic sensitivity of the isolates showed 
different patterns. All the three isolates showed complete 

resistance to erythromycin, two isolates showed resistance 
to benzyl penicillin, at least one isolate showed resistance 
to cotrimoxazole, cloxacillin and ampicillin. All the strains 
were sensitive to at least four antibiotics and resistant 
to three, among the panel which we tried. The detailed 
sensitivity and resistance patterns are presented in Table 
2.
Table 2
Antibiotic sensitivity and resistance profile of the Salmonella isolates.
Isolate  Resistant Moderately 
Most 
sensitive
sensitive 
CIP, CO
P, E, S
CTX
Cgnr1
Mund1 E, CO, CX
AMP
P
P, E, AMP
G
CTX
Mthy1
P (penicillin), CIP (ciprofloxacin), G (gentamicin), C (chloramphenicol), 
CTX (ceftriaxone), OTC (oxytetracyclin), CO (co-trimoxazole), E 
(erythromicin), S (streptomycin), CX (cloxacillin), AMP (ampicillin)

G, AMP, CTX, C
C, CTX, CIP, CO

Sensitive

CIP, G , AMP, CTX, OTC

3. Discussion
   Salmonellosis is a very important disease of avian species 
because of its huge economic impact, worldwide distribution 
and difficulty posed in the control of the disease. Barrow 
et al. opined that Salmonella remain as a serious economic 
problem to livestock in countries where measures of control 
are not efficient or in those where the climatic conditions 
favour the environmental spread of these microorganisms[1]. 
India qualifies for both of the above descriptions.
   Several outbreaks of salmonellosis have been reported 
from India over the years[5,6]. Fowl typhoid caused by 
S. gallinarum is a disease affecting grower birds than 
older birds and much less prevalent among chicks. The 
differentiation of S. pullorum and S. gallinarum cannot 
be made clearly from the disease symptoms and lesions 
as lesions produced by certain strains of S. gallinarum in 
chicks are indistinguishable from those produced by S. 
pullorum. The gross lesions observed were similar to those 
described by Shivaprasad[7].
   Rappaport-Vassiliadis broth is considered superior for 
pre-enrichment of intestinal contents[8]. From liver and 
spleen, we obtained pure cultures. But mixed cultures 
were obtained from heart blood and intestinal contents 
even after pre-enrichment. S. gallinarum and S. pullorum 
strains have very similar biochemical reactions, but they 
can be differentiated by their ability to decarboxylase 
ornithine and metabolize sugars like dulcitol, maltose and 
rhamnose[3]. Isolates typical of Salmonella not fermenting 
dulcitol and decarboxylating ornithine were considered 
S. pullorum. S. gallinarum mostly ferments dulcitol and 
maltose but not rhamnose. S. pullorum ferments dulcitol 
and rhamnose, but most strains give a negative reaction to 
maltose. The biochemical reactions obtained for our isolates 
were in accordance with the classical reactions reported for 
S. gallinarum. In the present study, all the three isolates 

Ramachandranpillai Rajagopal and Mangattumuruppel Mini/Asian Pac J Trop Biomed 2013; 3(6): 496-500

499
fermented dulcitol and maltose. Rhamnose was not included 
in the panel of sugars we tested. Mund 1 and Cgnr 1 showed 
a negative ODB but Mthy1 decarboxylated ornithine. Such 
an aberrant reaction for S. gallinarum was previously 
reported by Crichton and old[9], where one out of 50 of their 
S. gallinarum strains showed a positive reaction for ODB.
   Epidemiology of salmonellosis is complex. Kumar et 
al. established the role of hatcheries in spreading the 
Salmonella infection[5]. More than one third (37.8%) of 
hatcheries they studied were found to be infected with 
Salmonella. The maximum number of outbreaks (n=96) 
was recorded in the age group of 7-9 d while the maximum 
mortality was found in chickens of 1-2 weeks of age, which 
was true in our case also. Vertical transmission cannot 
be ruled out atleast in case of Chengannur farm, as this 
outbreak coincided with the import of new stock. First 
indication of salmonellosis in a farm is an excessive number 
of dead-in-shell chicks and deaths shortly after hatching 
as observed in the case of Mannuthy farm. The control of 
Salmonella is difficult as Salmonella can remain in the 
environment. Rodents also play an important role in the 
persistence of salmonella in poultry farms[10].
   Various antimicrobial agents have been used for curbing 
the mortality. The antibiotic resistance of Salmonella 
strains of avian origin is attributed to chromosomal 
mutation, gene transfer mechanisms like conjugation, 
transduction and transformation. Avian Salmonella shows 
resistance against many antimicrobials; tetracycline, 
oxy tetracycline, penicillin, aminoglycosides, sulpha 
drugs and fluoroquinolones[6,11,12]. In this study, all the 
strains showed complete resistance against at least three 
antibiotics and some were only moderately sensitive 
which will become resistant in near future. Singh and 
Gupta observed considerable variation in the resistance 
pattern of different isolates of Salmonella and the isolates 
showed 100% sensitivity to chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, 
cephazoline, gentamicin and 100% resistance to penicillin 
G; which correlated with our results[13]. With the bacteria 
gaining antimicrobial resistance over time, the situation is 
alarming in that the scope for treatment is getting limited 
and narrowed down to currently sensitive antibiotics, for 
which the bacteria will eventually acquire resistance since 
they will be used excessively and indiscriminately. The 
prophylactic use of many antimicrobials in poultry feed can 
also lead to acquired antibiotic resistance[14].
   The birds were treated with ceftriaxone and it contained 
the infection in all the farms. In addition, disinfection of the 
entire farm by formaldehyde spraying and fumigation also 
helped in control of the disease. The farm authorities were 
advised to  stop all hatching operations, screen all birds with 
on-the-spot slide agglutination test for salmonellosis, cull 
all the positive reactors, make the sheds rodent proof, ensure 
thorough disinfection of incubators and to periodically 
screen the birds for Salmonella. 
   Salmonella outbreaks can seriously affect the functioning 

500
of poultry farms and hatcheries. Disinfection and eradication 
measures are extremely tedious and chances of further 
infections are many fold after an initial attack. Futher 
studies of these strains like PCR identification, plasmid 
analysis, virulence studies, outer membrane proteomics and 
serotyping are to be done.
  
Conflict of interest statement
   We declare that we have no conflict of interest.

Acknowledgements
   Authors acknowledge the Dean, College of Veterinary and 
Animal Sciences, Mannuthy, Kerala, India for providing the 
facilities to carry out the study.

Comments 

Background
   This is an interesting manuscript reporting the prevalence 
of Salmonella species in three different farms in Southern 
part of India. The study is very significant because 
understanding the biotype of Salmonella species is critical 
to implement prophylactic and therapeutic measures.
  Research frontiers
   Molecular identification and characterization using PCR, 
ribotyping, plasmid profiling, proteomics etc.
Related reports
   Limited reports are available regarding the species 
specific characterization of Salmonella during outbreak from 
India particularly from Kerala. 
Innovations and breakthroughs
   Although current case report didn’t use innovative 
techniques, the report has practical application in disease 
diagnosis and designing treatment strategies.
  Applications
   The isolation and characterization of the causative agent 
is very important for the effective control and prevention 
of any disease. The present study gives an idea about the 
prevalence of Salmonella in poultry farms, techniques for 
isolation, identification of the  causative agent and the 
control measures which should be implemented in case of 
an outbreak. The study also provides information about the 
antibiotic sensitivity and resistance pattern of the bacteria 
which will help in the selection of a suitable antibiotic in 
case of a future outbreak.   

Ramachandranpillai Rajagopal and Mangattumuruppel Mini/Asian Pac J Trop Biomed 2013; 3(6): 496-500 

Peer review
   This is a good study of three outbreaks of Avian 
salmonellosis in which the authors isolated/characterized 
the causative agent and compared their antibiogram profile. 
The results are significant in terms of antibiotic resistance 
profile which will prove useful in future outbreak cases. 

References
[1]    Barrow PA, Freitas Neto OC. Pullorum disease and fowl typhoid-
new thoughts on old diseases: a review. Avian Pathol 2011; 40: 
1-13. 
[2]    Kumar Y, Sharma A, Sehgal R, Kumar S. Distribution trends of 
salmonella serovars in India (2001-2005). Transact  Royal Soc Trop 
Med Hyg 2009; 103: 390-394.
[3]    Office International des Epizooties (OIE). Fowl typhoid and 
pullorum disease. In: Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines 
for Terrestrial Animals. 7th ed. Paris: Office International des 
Epizooties; 2012, p. 1-14. 
[4]    Jorgensen JH, Turnidge JD. Susceptibility test methods: 
dilution and disk diffusion methods. In:  Murray PR, Baron EJ, 
Jorgensen JH, Landry ML, Pfaller MA. (eds.) Manual of Clinical 
Microbiology. Washington DC: ASM Press; 2007.
[5]    Kumar T, Mahajan NK, Rakha NK. Epidemiology of fowl typhoid 
in Haryana, India. World  Poult  Sci J 2010; 66: 503-510. 
[6]    Taddele MH, Rathore R, Dhama K. Antibiogram assay of S. 
gallinarum and other S. enterica serovars of poultry origin in 
India. Asian J Anim Vet Adv 2012; 7: 309-317.
[7]    Shivaprasad HL. Fowl typhoid and pullorum disease. Rev Sci 
Tech 2000; 19(2): 405-424.
[8]    Gorski L. Selective enrichment media bias the types of 
Salmonella enterica strains isolated from mixed strain cultures 
and complex enrichment broths. PLoS ONE 2012; 7: e34722. 
[9]    Crichton PB, Old DC. Salmonellae of serotypes gallinarum and 
pullorum grouped by biotyping and fimbrial-gene probing. J Med 
Microbiol 1990; 32: 145-152.
[10]  Meerburg BG, Kijlstra A. Role of rodents in transmission of 
Salmonella and Campylobacter. J Sci Food Agric 2007; 81: 
2774-2781.
[11]  Parveen S, Taabodi M, Schwarz JG, Oscar TP, Harter-Dennis J, 
White DG. Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella 
recovered from processed poultry. J Food Prot 2007; 70: 2466-
2472.
[12]   Sjölund-Karlsson M, Howie R, Rickert R, Krueger A, Tran TT, 
Zhao S, et al. Plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance among 
non-Typhi Salmonella enterica isolates, USA. Emerg Infect Dis 
2010; 16: 1789-1791.
[13]  Singh SK, Gupta RS. In vitro drug sensitiviy of different 
Salmonella serovars isolated from necropsied birds of Tarai 
region. Indian J Comp Microbiol Immunol Infect Dis 1999; 20: 
149-150.
[14]  Iovine NM, Blaser MJ. Antibiotics in animal feed and spread of 
resistant Campylobacter from poultry to humans. Emerg Infect Dis 
2004; 10: 1158-1159.

