Characterization of Salmonella Gallinarum from an outbreak in Raigarh, 

Chhattisgarh

Chandrahas Sannat1, Anil Patyal2, Nidhi Rawat1, R. C. Ghosh3, D. K. Jolhe3, R. K. Shende1, S. D. Hirpurkar1 and  

Sanjay Shakya2

RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access

1. Department of Veterinary Microbiology, College of Veterinary Science & Animal Husbandry, Chhattisgarh Kamdhenu 
Vishwavidyalaya, Anjora, Durg - 491 001, Chhattisgarh, India; 2. Department of Veterinary Public Health, College of 

Veterinary Science & Animal Husbandry, Chhattisgarh Kamdhenu Vishwavidyalaya, Anjora, Durg - 491 001, Chhattisgarh, 

India; 3. Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Science & Animal Husbandry, Chhattisgarh 

Kamdhenu Vishwavidyalaya, Anjora, Durg - 491 001, Chhattisgarh, India.

Corresponding author: Chandrahas Sannat, e-mail: csannat@rediffmail.com,  

Co-authors: AP: anilvet01@gmail.com, NR: dr_nidhirawat@yahoo.com, RCG: rcghosh@rediffmail.com,  

DKJ: djolhe@gmail.com, RKS: rshende786@rediffmail.com, SDH: smpuhir@yahoo.com,  

Received: 15-08-2016, Accepted: 31-12-2016, Published online: 05-02-2017

SS: drskshakya1@yahoo.co.in

doi:  10.14202/vetworld.2017.144-148  How  to  cite  this  article:  Sannat  C,  Patyal  A,  Rawat  N,  Ghosh  RC,  Jolhe  DK, 
Shende  RK,  Hirpurkar  SD,  Shakya  S  (2017)  Characterization  of  Salmonella  Gallinarum  from  an  outbreak  in  Raigarh, 
Chhattisgarh, Veterinary World, 10(2): 144-148.

Abstract

Aim: The present investigation was conducted to isolate and characterize Salmonella Gallinarum from an outbreak of fowl 
typhoid in layer birds.
Materials and Methods: Clinically ill and dead layer birds from an outbreak were investigated. History, clinical signs, and 
postmortem lesions were suggestive of fowl typhoid. Postmortem samples including heart blood, intestinal contents, pieces 
of ovary, and liver were collected and processed immediately for bacterial culture, serotyping and antibiotic sensitivity tests. 
Isolates were further screened for the presence of extended spectrum beta lactamase (ESBL) (blaTEM) gene by polymerase 
chain reaction.
Results:  On  the  basis  of  cultural,  staining  and  biochemical  characteristics;  three  bacterial  isolates  were  confirmed  as 
S. Gallinarum. On serotyping, somatic antigen O: 9 and 12 with nonflagellated antigen were detected in all three isolates. 
Isolates were intermediate sensitive to amoxycillin, amoxyclav, gentamicin and ciprofloxacin and resistant to most of the 
antibiotics including chloramphenicol, ampicillin, ceftazidime, cefexime, cefepime, azithromycin, nalidixin, tetracycline, 
oxytetracycline, and streptomycin. Two isolates were found to harbor ESBL (blaTEM) gene.
Conclusion: Beta lactamase producer S. Gallinarum was confirmed as cause of increased mortality in layer birds during 
present investigation. Existence of multi drug resistant Salmonella poses serious threat to poultry industry in Chhattisgarh.
Keywords: blaTEM, O: 9; 12, poultry, Salmonella Gallinarum.
Introduction

Poultry industry is facing great setbacks due to 
frequent outbreaks of salmonellosis. Although many 
developed  countries  have  eradicated  these  diseases 
from  commercial  poultry,  it  has  increased  inci-
dence  in  most  developing  countries.  Fowl  typhoid 
caused  by  Salmonella  Enterica  subsp.  Enterica 
serovar  Gallinarum  biovar  Gallinarum  (Salmonella 
Gallinarum),  produces  high  mortality  rates  (up  to 
90%)  in  birds  of  all  ages,  thus  causing  heavy  eco-
nomic  loss  [1].  Fowl  typhoid  has  been  reported 
from  various  parts  of  India  including  Kashmir  [2], 
Haryana [3], Kerala [4], and Kolkata [5]; however, 
reports are lacking from Chhattisgarh state despite its 
high prevalence, which can be attributed to limited 

License 

Copyright:  Sannat,  et  al.  Open  Access.  This  article  is  distributed 
under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  4.0 
International 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/),  which  permits  unrestricted  use,  distribution,  and 
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit 
to  the  original  author(s)  and  the  source,  provide  a  link  to  the 
Creative  Commons  license,  and  indicate  if  changes  were  made. 
The  Creative  Commons  Public  Domain  Dedication  waiver  (http://
creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data 
made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.

Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

diagnostic facilities under field conditions and under 
reporting.

Laboratory  diagnosis  of  Salmonella  relies  on 
selection  of  suitable  sampling  procedure  combined 
with a sensitive culture method and further confirma-
tion by biochemical characteristics including IMViC 
pattern,  sugar  fermentation,  and  hydrogen  sulfide 
production [5]. However, control of fowl typhoid is 
difficult  due  to  lack  of  proper  diagnosis  and  emer-
gence of antibiotic resistance [6]. The prevalence of 
drug  resistant  gene  blaTEM  type  extended  spectrum 
beta-lactamases  (ESBLs)  between  Escherichia  coli 
and  Klebsiella  has  been  frequently  demonstrated 
in  several  countries  but  it  is  worth  recognizing  the 
emergence of ESBLs in Salmonella, which now con-
fers  serious  clinical  problem  [7]. The  determination 
of  antibiotic  susceptibility  and  multidrug  resistance 
pattern of infectious organisms is therefore necessary 
to  provide  a  vivid  guide  for  veterinarians  to  make 
informed  drug  choices  during  the  management  and 
treatment of poultry diseases.

The  present  report  sheds  light  on  an  outbreak 
of  salmonellosis  at  Government  Poultry  Farm  in 
144

Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.10/February-2017/2.pdfChhattisgarh (India) describing the disease diagnosis, 
agent characterization, and antibiotic resistance.
Materials and Methods
Ethical approval

No ethical approval was necessary to pursue this 

research work.
Sample collection

Increased  mortality  over  a  period  of  3-week 
was reported in Giriraj and RIR adult layer birds of 
age groups 7-8 months at Government Poultry Farm, 
Raigarh,  Chhattisgarh.  Birds  exhibited  acute  illness, 
high temperature, ruffled feather, difficulty in breath-
ing,  reduced  feed  intake,  reluctance  to  move,  and 
watery  diarrhea.  During  postmortem  examination, 
heart  blood  was  collected  aseptically  from  10  birds 
in  sterilized  syringe.  On  postmortem  examination, 
generalized  tissue  congestion  and  dark  friable  and 
coppery bronze colored enlarged liver were observed 
which were suggestive of fowl typhoid. Swab of heart 
and intestinal contents; tissue pieces of ovary and liver 
were collected at necropsy of all chickens for bacteri-
ological examination.
Bacterial isolation

The  samples  were  inoculated  immediately  in 
Rappaport Vassiliadis Soya (RVS) peptone broth for 
selective  enrichment  of  Salmonella  organisms  and 
incubated at 37°C for 24 h [8]. After selective enrich-
ment, one loopful of each RVS culture was streaked 
onto on to MacConkey lactose agar (MLA), brilliant 
green agar (BGA), xylose-lysine-deoxycholate (XLD) 
agar, and blood agar and incubated at 37°C for 24 h. 
The  nonlactose  fermenting  colonies  of  MLA  were 
characterized microscopically using Gram’s-stain.
Biotyping

Biochemical 

identification  of  bacterial 

iso-
lates  was  done  as  described  in  OIE  Manual  of 
Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals, 
Volume  1  [8].  Briefly,  the  tests  employed  were  cat-
alase,  oxidase,  O/F  test,  motility  test  using  motility 
indole  urea  medium,  reactions  on  triple  sugar  iron 
agar  (TSI),  urease,  nitrate  reduction,  indole,  methyl 
red  (MR), Voges  Proskauer  (VP),  citrate  utilization, 
lysine  decarboxylase,  and  sugar  fermentation  tests 
(i.e.,  glucose,  sucrose  and  lactose  with  an  inverted 
durham  tube  for  acid  and  gas  production,  maltose, 
dulcitol  and  rhamnose  fermentation). All  the  media 
used were procured from HiMedia.
Serotyping

The serotyping of Salmonella isolates was per-
formed  by  National  E.  coli  and  Salmonella  Typing 
Center, Central Research Institute, Kasauli, Himachal 
Pradesh.
Antibiotic sensitivity test (ABST)

The ABST was conducted by the disc diffusion 
method as per Bauer et al. [9] in Muller Hinton agar. 
Antimicrobial inhibition zone diameter was measured 

a 

-3’ 

and 

and categorized as susceptible, intermediate or resis-
tant. Antibiotic discs (HiMedia) of widely used anti-
microbials  such  as  ciprofloxacin  (5  µg),  cefixime 
(5 µg), amoxyclav (30 µg), ceftazidime (30 µg), chlor-
amphenicol  (30  µg),  azithromycin  (15  µg),  amoxy-
cillin (30 µg), ampicillin (10 µg), cefepime (30 µg), 
enrofloxacin  (10  µg),  nalidixin  (30  µg),  gentamicin 
(10 µg), tetracycline (30 µg), oxytetracycline (30 µg), 
and streptomycin (10 µg) were used.
Detection of multidrug resistant gene

reverse 

blaTEM 

Salmonella  isolate  was  further  screened  for 
the  presence  of  blaTEM  gene  by  polymerase  chain 
reaction  (PCR)  following  the  protocol  described 
by  Monstein  et  al.  [10]  with  some  modifications. 
For  PCR,  template  DNA  incorporated  in  reactions 
was prepared by boiling and snap chill method [11]. 
Purity  and  concentration  of  DNA  was  detected  by 
0.8% agarose gel electrophoresis and stored at −20°C. 
Recommended  primer  set  of  a  blaTEM  forward 
primer:  5’-  TCGCCGCATACACTATTCTCAGAA 
TGA 
primer: 
5’-  ACGCTCACCGGCTCCAGATTTAT  -3’  were 
used  to  obtain  a  predicted  product  size  of  445  bp 
(Imperial  Life  Sciences  (P)  Limited,  Gurgaon, 
Haryana, India). PCR reactions were performed in a 
total volume of 25 µl containing ×10 PCR buffer (Tris 
with 15 mM MgCl2), 250 µM of each deoxyribonu-
cleotide triphosphate, 10 pmol of each gene-specific 
primers,  1  U  Taq  polymerase  and  3  µl  of  template 
DNA. PCR amplification was done using thermocy-
cler (Mastercycler, Eppendorf, Germany), and cycles 
were performed with initial denaturation of 95°C for 
10 min; 30 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 30 s, 
annealing  at  60°C  for  30  s,  extension  at  72°C  for 
2 min, followed by a final extension step at 72°C for 
10 min. After the completion of reaction cycles, the 
amplified products were electrophoresed on 1.5% aga-
rose gel stained with ethidium bromide (0.5 µg/ml). 
The images of ethidium bromide stained DNA bands 
were  analyzed  under  ultraviolet  transilluminator 
(Biometra)  and  digitized  using  a  gel  documentation 
system (Gel DocTM XR, Biorad, USA). Reagents used 
in PCR were procured from Thermo Scientific (USA) 
and Bangalore Genei (India).
Results
Cultural  and  staining  characteristics  of  bacterial 
isolates

Gram-staining  revealed  the  presence  of  small 
rod shape Gram-negative bacteria arranged singly and 
in pair (Figure-1). RVS culture of heart blood, swab 
of heart, and intestinal contents showed two types of 
colony morphology; three isolates showed colorless, 
translucent,  smooth  and  raised  colonies  on  MLA, 
indicative of lactose non fermenter organisms and oth-
ers produced pink color colonies indicative of lactose 
fermenter organisms (Figure-2). On BGA, nonlactose 
fermenter isolates produced light pink colony against a 
rose pink background and was non hemolytic on blood 

Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

145

Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.10/February-2017/2.pdfagar. On XLD agar, red colonies were produced ini-
tially after 24 h of incubation, which get blackened at 
center on prolonged incubation (Figure-3). Similarly, 
on TSI, the reaction occurred slowly with the produc-
tion  of  gas  and  black  color  colonies.  Cultural  char-
acteristics of above three isolates were suggestive of 
Salmonella organisms.
Biochemical profile of bacterial isolates

All three isolates were catalase negative, oxidase 
positive, fermentative, urease negative, lysine decar-
boxylase positive, indole negative, MR positive, VP 
negative,  citrate  utilization  positive,  and  nonmotile. 
However, nonmotile organisms were considered to be 
either Salmonella Pullorum or S. Gallinarum. During 
the present investigation, all three isolates fermented 
glucose,  dulcitol,  maltose  and  lysine  decarboxylase 
but  not  rhamnose,  sucrose  and  lactose  which  con-
firmed biovar as S. Gallinarum.
Salmonella serotype

All three Salmonella isolates were serotyped as 

S. Gallinarum with somatic antigen O: 9 and 12.
Antibiogram of S. Gallinarum

Salmonella Gallinarum isolates were intermedi-
ate sensitive to amoxyclav, amoxycillin, gentamicin, 
ciprofloxacin  and  enrofloxacin  however  resistant  to 
chloramphenicol,  ampicillin,  ceftazidime,  cefexime, 
cefepime,  azithromycin,  nalidixin, 
tetracycline, 
oxytetracycline and streptomycin.
ESBL blaTEM gene

Two isolates of S. Gallinarum were found to har-
bor  the  drug  resistant  blaTEM  gene  having  amplicon 
size of 445 bp (Figure-4).
Discussion

Figure-1: Gram-staining of Salmonella isolates.

Figure-2: Salmonella colonies on MacConkey agar.

Figure-3: Salmonella colonies on xylose-lysine-deoxycholate 
agar.

Salmonellosis  is  becoming  serious  problem  in 
developing country like India since control measures 
are not efficient and also the climatic conditions favor 
the  environmental  spread  of  these  organisms  [12] 
which  might  lead  to  increased  incidence  of  salmo-
nellosis.  Likewise  present  study,  Kumari  et  al.  [1], 
Ambily and Mini [4], and Dey et al. [5] also recorded 
increased mortality due to fowl typhoid. Clinical signs 
and gross pathology reported in present investigation 
corresponds with the findings of Kumari et al. [1] who 
also noticed swollen and congested liver with bronze 
discoloration in cases of fowl typhoid.

Since the isolation and correct identification of 
Salmonella are very crucial for the characterization, 
the  colonies  having  typical  cultural  characteristics 
were selected as presumptive for Salmonella serovars. 
Cultural morphology on XLD, MLA and BGA was in 
accordance with the findings of Park et al. [13] and 
Ferdous et al. [14]. Differentiation of two nonmotile 
biovars, viz., S. Gallinarum and S. Pullorum done by 
specific  sugar  fermentation  tests  concurs  with  the 
report of Rahman et al. [15]. Biochemical reactions 
and antigenic formula reported during present investi-
gation were classical findings of S. Gallinarum [5,16].
Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

Figure-4:  Agarose  gel  electrophoresis  showing  amplified 
polymerase chain reaction product of blaTEM gene. Lane M: 
100 bp DNA ladder, Lane 1, 2: Salmonella isolates with no 
amplicon, Lane 3: Salmonella Gallinarum isolate with blaTEM 
positive amplicon (445 bp).

The widespread and irrational use of antimicro-
bial  drugs  in  poultry  production  has  contributed  to 
the  emergence  and  maintenance  of  resistance  genes 
particularly ESBLs genes, which poses serious threat 
146

Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.10/February-2017/2.pdfnot only to poultry industry but also of public health 
concern  [17].  Similar  to  present  findings,  multidrug 
resistant Salmonella serovar were reported by Zafer 
Ata et al. [18] and Andoh et al. [19], whereas limited 
drug resistance in S. Gallinarum was observed by Dey 
et al.  [5].  Likewise  present  study,  Kumari  et al.  [1] 
reported  S.  Gallinarum  isolates  sensitive  to  cipro-
floxacin,  enrofloxacin  and  gentamicin,  amoxicillin, 
amoxyclav, and resistant to nalidixic acid. Salmonella. 
Gallinarum  isolates  sensitive  to  ciprofloxacin  and 
resistant to chloramphenicol were reported by Parvej 
et al. [20] and Ferdous et al. [14], respectively, which 
also concur our present finding. In contrast, Kumari 
et  al.  [1]  reported  reemergence  of  chlorampheni-
col sensitivity, and Filho et al. [6] reported reduced 
susceptibility  of  isolates  to  enrofloxacin,  cipro-
floxacin,  norfloxacin,  and  ofloxacin.  Emergence  of 
ESBLs  genes  in  salmonellae  poses  serious  problem 
in  management  and  treatment  of  salmonellosis  in 
poultry [21,22]. In hormony with the present findings, 
earlier study also reported, blaTEM positive salmonellae 
isolates of poultry resistant to ampicillin [23]; amoxy-
clav, ampicillin and cefalothin [24] and nalidixic acid, 
chloramphenicol, tetracycline and trimethoprim [22].
Conclusion

ESBL  producer  S.  Gallinarum  was  reported  as 
the cause of increase mortality in layer birds at poultry 
farm of Chhattisgarh. Emergence of multidrug resis-
tant Salmonella with ESBLs activity during this study 
pretense a serious threat for future treatment options 
in poultry industry in Chhattisgarh.
Authors’ Contributions

CS  designed  the  experiment  under  supervision 
of SDH. Postmortem examination was made by RCG 
and  DKJ.  Media  preparation,  sample  collection  and 
bacteriological  analysis  were  performed  by  CS,  NR 
and RKS. Molecular work was performed by AP and 
SS. All authors participated in draft and revision of the 
manuscript. All  authors  read  and  approved  the  final 
manuscript.
Acknowledgments

The  authors  are  highly  thankful  to  National 
E.  coli  and  Salmonella  Typing  Center,  Central 
Research  Institute,  Kasauli,  Himachal  Pradesh,  for 
performing serotyping work during this study.
Competing Interests

The authors declare that they have no competing 

interests.
References
1. 

2. 

Kumari,  D.,  Mishra,  S.K.  and  Lather,  D. 
(2013) 
Pathomicrobial studies on Salmonella Gallinarum infection 
in broiler chickens. Vet. World., 6(10): 725-729.
Nazir, S., Kamil, S.A., Darzi, M.M., Mir, M.S., Nazir, K. 
and Amar, A. (2012) Pathology of spontaneously occurring 
salmonellosis  in  commercial  broiler  chickens  of  Kashmir 
valley. J. World’s Poult. Res., 2(4): 63-69.

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Arora, D., Kumar, S., Singh, D., Jindal, N. and Mahajan, N. 
(2013) Isolation, characterization and antibiogram pattern 
of Salmonella from poultry in parts of Haryana. India. Adv. 
Anim. Vet. Sci., 1(5): 161-163.
Ambily, R. and Mini, M. (2014) Salmonellosis in Japanese 
quails - A report from central Kerala, India. Int. J. Sci. Res., 
3: 361-363.
Dey, S., Mahanti, A., Batabyal, K., Joardar, S.N., Samanta, I., 
Isore, D.P. and Pakhira, M.C. (2016) Identification and anti-
microbial susceptibility of Salmonella Gallinarum isolated 
from  fowl  typhoid  outbreak  in  backyard  Vanaraja  fowl. 
Explor. Anim. Med. Res., 6(1): 63-67.
Filho, R.A.C., Ferreira, J.C., Kanashiro, A.M.I., Darini, A.L.D. 
and  Junior,  A.B.  (2016)  Antimicrobial  susceptibility  of 
Salmonella  Gallinarum  and  Salmonella  Pullorum  isolated 
from ill poultry in Brazil. Cien. Rural, 46(3): 513-518.
Oghenevo,  O.,  Bassey,  B.,  Yhiler,  N.,  Francis,  U.  and 
Angela, O. (2016) Antibiotic resistance in extended spec-
trum  beta-lactamases  (Esbls)  Salmonella  species  isolated 
from  patients  with  diarrhoea  in  Calabar,  Nigeria.  J.  Clin. 
Infect. Dis. Pract., 1: 107.
OIE. (2012) Fowl typhoid and Pullorum disease. In: Manual 
of  Diagnostic Tests  and Vaccines  for Terrestrial Animals. 
7th ed. Office International Des Epizooties, Paris. p1-14.
Bauer, A.W., Kirby, W.M.M., Shernis, J.C. and Turck, M. 
(1966) Antibiotic susceptibility testing by standardized sin-
gle disc method. Am. J. Clin. Pathol., 45(4): 493-497.

10.  Monstein,  H.J.,  Ostholm  Balkhed,  A.,  Nilsson,  M.V., 
Nilsson,  M.,  Dornbusch,  K.  and  Nilsson,  L.E.  (2007) 
the  detec-
Multiplex  PCR  amplification  assay 
tion  of  blaSHV,  blaTEM  and  blaCTX-M  genes 
in 
Enterobacteriaceae. APMIS., 115(12): 1400-1408.

11.  Nagappa, K., Tamuly, S., Brajmadhuri, Saxena, M.K. and 
Singh,  S.P.  (2007)  Isolation  of  Salmonella  Typhimurium 
from poultry eggs and meat of Tarai region of Uttaranchal. 
Indian J. Biotechnol., 6: 407-409.

for 

12.  Barrow, P.A. and Freitas Neto, O.C. (2011) Pullorum dis-
ease  and  fowl  typhoid--new  thoughts  on  old  diseases: A 
review. Avian Pathol., 40(1): 1-13.

13.  Park, S.H., Ryu, S. and Kang, D.H. (2012) Development of 
an improved selective and differential medium for isolation 
of Salmonella spp. J. Clin. Microbiol., 50(10): 3222-3226.
14.  Ferdous, T.A., Lutful Kabir, S.M., Mansurul Amin, M. and 
Mahmud Hossain, K.M. (2013) Identification and antimi-
crobial  susceptibility  of  Salmonella  species  isolated  from 
washing and rinsed water of broilers in pluck shops. Int. J. 
Anim. Vet. Adv., 5(1): 1-8.

15.  Rahman, B.A., Wasfy, M.O., Maksoud, M.A., Hanna, N., 
Dueger, E. and House, B. (2014) Multi-drug resistance and 
reduced  susceptibility  to  ciprofloxacin  among  Salmonella 
Enterica serovar Typhi isolates from the Middle East and 
central Asia. New Microbes. New Infect., 2(4): 88-92.

16.  Mir,  I.A.,  Kashyap,  S.K.  and  Maherchandani,  S.  (2015) 
Isolation, serotype diversity and antibiogram of Salmonella 
Enterica isolated from different species of poultry in India. 
Asian Pac. J. Trop. Biomed., 5(7): 561-567.

17.  Liebana,  E.,  Carattoli,  A.,  Coque,  T.M.,  Hasman,  H., 
Magiorakos,  A.P.,  Mevius,  D.,  Poirel,  L.,  Schuepbach-
Regula,  G.,  Torneke,  K.,  Torren-Edo,  J.,  Torres,  C.  and 
Threlfall,  J.  (2013)  Public  health  risks  of  enterobacterial 
isolates  producing  extended-spectrum  beta-lactamases  or 
AmpC  beta-lactamases  in  food  and  food-producing  ani-
mals: An EU perspective of epidemiology, analytical meth-
ods, risk factors, and control options. Clin. Infect. Dis. 56: 
1030-1037.

18.  Zafer  Ata,  Z.,  Dinç,  G.,  Yibar,  A.,  Müştak,  H.K.  and 
Şahan, O. (2015) Extended spectrum beta-lactamase activ-
ity and multidrug resistance of Salmonella serovars isolated 
from  chicken  carcasses  from  different  regions  of  Turkey. 
Ankara Üniv. Vet. Fak. Derg., 62: 119-123.

19.  Andoh,  L.A.,  Dalsgaard,  A.,  Obiri-Danso,  K., 
Newman, M.J., Barco, L. and Olsen, J.E. (2016) Prevalence 

Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

147

Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.10/February-2017/2.pdfand  antimicrobial  resistance  of  Salmonella  serovars  iso-
lated  from  poultry  in  Ghana.  Epidemiol.  Infect.,  144(15): 
3288-3299.

20.  Parvej,  M.S.,  Nazir,  K.H.M.,  Rahman,  M.B.,  Jahan,  M., 
Khan, M.F.R. and Rahman, M. (2016) Prevalence and char-
acterization  of  multi-drug  resistant  Salmonella  Enterica 
serovar Gallinarum biovar Pullorum and Gallinarum from 
chicken. Vet. World, 9(1): 65-70.

21.  Wu,  H.,  Wang,  Y.,  Wu,  Y.,  Qiao,  J.,  Li,  H.,  Zheng,  S., 
Xia, X., Cui, S., Wang, X., Xi, M., Meng, J. and Yang, B. 
(2015) Emergence of β-lactamases and extended-spectrum 
β-lactamases (ESBLs) producing Salmonella in retail raw 
chicken in China. Foodborne Pathog. Dis., 12(3): 228-234.

22.  Abdel-Maksoud,  M.,  Abdel-Khalek,  R.,  El-Gendy,  A., 
Gamal,  R.F.,  Abdelhady,  H.M.  and  House,  B.L.  (2015) 
Genetic characterisation of multidrug-resistant Salmonella 
Enterica  serotypes  isolated  from  poultry  in  Cairo,  Egypt. 
Afr. J. Lab. Med., 4(1): 1-7.

23.  Türkyılmaz,  S.,  Hazımoğlu,  Ş.  and  Bozdoğan,  B.  (2009) 
in 
Antimicrobial  susceptibility  and  resistance  genes 
Salmonella  Enterica  serovar  enteritidis  isolated  from 
Turkeys. Isr. J. Vet. Med., 64(3): 72-77.

24.  Lynne, A.M., Rhodes-Clark, B.S., Bliven, K., Zhao, S. and 
Foley, S.L. (2008) Antimicrobial resistance genes associated 
with Salmonella Enterica serovar newport isolates from food 
animals. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 52(1): 353-356.

********

Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

148

Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.10/February-2017/2.pdf