Zoonoses and Public Health

S H O R T C O M M U N I C A T I O N

Prevalence of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococci on a Farm:
Staff can Harbour MRS When Animals Do Not
G. de V. Aquino, R. P. Maluta and F. A. de A´ vila

Departamento de Patologia Veterina´ ria, Laborato´ rio de Bacteriologia, Universidade Estadual Paulista Ju´ lio de Mesquita Filho, Faculdade de Cieˆ ncias
Agra´ rias e Veterina´ rias de Jaboticabal, Brazil

Impacts
• Methicillin-resistant Staphylococci (MRS) are multi-resistant bacteria
which have been a severe public health problem in the entire world,
mainly causing nosocomial infections.
In this study MRS have been detected in humans but not in animals.

•
• The results show that staff can harbour MRS and not necessarily transmit

it to the animals.

Correspondence:
Professor F. A. de A´ vila. Universidade Estadual
Paulista Ju´ lio de Mesquita Filho, Faculdade de
Cieˆ ncias Agra´ rias e Veterina´ rias de
Jaboticabal, Departamento de Patologia
Veterina´ ria, Rod. Paulo Donato Castellane,
Km 5 – Rural CEP: 14870-000, Jaboticabal,
SP, Brazil. Tel.: +55 (16) 32092652; Fax: +55
(16) 32024275; E-mail: favila@fcav.unesp.br

Received for publication January 10, 2011

doi: 10.1111/j.1863-2378.2011.01413.x

Summary

The aim of this work was to establish the prevalence of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococci (MRS) in the animals and staff of a teaching and research farm.
Samples of dairy cattle (36), beef cattle (26), sheep (19), horses (21), pigs (23),
goats (23) and humans (13) were collected and screened for the presence of
MRS. The detection of mecA gene was performed by PCR to determine the
resistance of the samples to methicillin. Antimicrobial-resistance testing to pen-
icillin, meropenem, ceftriaxone, cephalothin, oxacillin, levoﬂoxacin, enroﬂoxa-
cin, chloramphenicol, ciproﬂoxacin, gentamicin, clindamycin, erytromycin,
linezolid, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, tetracycline, doxycycline and vanco-
mycin was performed on the mecA+ isolates. From the 161 samples, four
methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative Staphylococci (MRCoNS) were isolated
from human beings (31%), whereas none was isolated from animals (0%). No
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) were isolated. All of the
MRCoNS isolates from this work presented different antimicrobial resistance
patterns. MRCoNS may be present in humans associated with animals while
not present in the animals. Selective pressure outside of the farm and a lack of
MRCoNS transmission between humans and animals may be responsible for
this lack of correlation.

Introduction

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococci have been an important
public health problem in the entire world, mainly through
nosocomial infections. MRS are often multi-resistant bac-
teria and the species most representative of this group is
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). The detection of MRS in
veterinary units within different countries (Lilenbaum
et al., 1998; Gortel et al., 1999; van Duijkeren et al., 2004a;
Weese et al., 2004), as well as the likelihood of MRSA
transmission between animals and man (van Duijkeren
et al., 2004b; Juha´sz-Kaszanyitzky et al., 2007), have dem-

onstrated the importance of monitoring the presence of
MRS and the level of antimicrobial resistance in animals.
Prevalence studies focused on different environments are
necessary to enhance the big picture of MRS epidemiology;
thus, this study aimed to determine the prevalence of MRS
in healthy animals and the people associated with them
(researchers and farm workers) at a farm that is used for
teaching and researching activities (located in the Faculty
of Agrarian Sciences and Veterinary Medicine of the Sa˜o
Paulo State University, in Jaboticabal-SP, Brazil) and fur-
ther characterize the antimicrobial resistance patterns in
the isolates.

ª 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH • Zoonoses Public Health. 59 (2012) 1–3

1

Prevalence of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococci on a Farm

G. de V. Aquino et al.

Materials and Methods

In total, 161 samples were collected from June 2008 to
March 2009 (36 from dairy cattle, 26 from beef cattle, 19
from sheep, 21 from horses, 23 from pigs, 23 from goats
and 13 from human beings). This study was approved by
the Sa˜o Paulo State University Ethics committee. All sam-
ples were collected from the nostrils of clinically healthy
animals and people using sterile cotton swabs. The swabs
were immediately placed in tubes containing an enrich-
ment broth (brain heart
infusion supplemented with
NaCl – 6%) and incubated for 48 h at 35°C. After incu-
bation, 10 ll of each tube was inoculated and streaked
onto Manitol salt agar with oxacyllin (2 lg/ml). The agar
plates were then incubated for 48 h at 35°C. Two visually
typical Staphylococci colonies were picked from each plate
and inoculated in BHI agar slants. To identify samples
that were of the Staphylococcus genus, the isolates were
submitted to the following tests: gram staining, catalase
and modiﬁed oxidase. Isolates of the genus Staphylococcus
were indentiﬁed either as coagulase-positive Staphylococci
(CoPS)
(CNS)
through the tube coagulase test with rabbit plasma. All
Staphylococci isolated were submitted to a thermal
lyses
procedure in order to obtain the DNA template. Detec-
tion of gene mecA was done by PCR (Gortel et al., 1999).
In cases in which both isolates from the same carrier were
mecA positive, only one isolate was used in further proce-
dures.

coagulase-negative

Staphylococci

or

MRS isolates were submitted to antimicrobial resistance
testing by the disk-diffusion method (Kirky-Bauer). The
following antimicrobials were tested: penicillin (10 UI),
meropenem (10 lg),
cephalothin
(30 lg), oxacillin (1 lg), levoﬂoxacin (5 lg), enroﬂoxacin
(5 lg), chloramphenicol (30 lg), ciproﬂoxacin (5 lg),
gentamicin (10 lg),
erytromycin
(15 lg), linezolid (30 lg), sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim

clindamycin (2 lg),

ceftriaxone

(30 lg),

(25 lg),
tetracycline (30 lg), doxycycline (30 lg) and
vancomycin (30 lg), and the corresponding breakpoints
were obtained using human and veterinary guidelines
(Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute, 2005, 2008).
Inducible resistance to clindamycin was tested by the ‘D
zone’ test (CLSI, 2008).

Results

coagulase-negative

Four Staphylococci were isolated that contained the gene
mecA by PCR. All four were coagulase negative and thus
methicillin-resistant
Staphylococci
(MRCoNS). These isolates were obtained exclusively from
the 13 human beings tested, demonstrating a prevalence
of MRCoNS of 31% in the humans and 0% in the ani-
mals. Table 1 shows
the
MRCoNS isolates. None of the MRCoNS showed induc-
ible resistance to clindamycin by the ‘D zone’ test. No
MRSA were isolated.

resistance patterns of

the

Discussion

The lack of MRSA isolation from the animals and human
beings tested in this study should be evaluated carefully
and does not prove the absence of MRSA in the entire
population at this site. However, the lack of MRSA in this
study and in another performed in the veterinary teaching
hospital of the same university (Maluta et al., 2010) sup-
ports a general trend of MRSA absence at this site.

The prevalence of MRCoNS in humans at this farm
(31%) was similar to the human prevalence in the veteri-
nary hospital cited above (36%). We hypothesize whether
this similar prevalence in both cases indicates that the
humans were contaminated in the community. These pre-
valences were lower than those found in three equine
facilities in Denmark (63%) (Moodley and Guardabassi,
2009),
selective

indicating that different degrees of

Table 1. Resistance patterns of four methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative Staphylococci isolated from human beings and local of sampling*

Isolate ID

Site of sampling

OXA*, 

ERI 

CLI 

GEN 

LEVà

ENR§

CIPà

CLO 

LNZà

SUT 

TT 

DOXà

VAN 

S107
S133
S160
S161

Pig sector
Goat sector
Beef cattle sector
Beef cattle sector

R
R
R
R

R
I
S
R

R
S
S
S

S
R
R
R

S
S
S
S

I
S
S
S

S
S
S
S

R
S
S
R

S
S
S
S

R
S
R
R

R
S
S
I

R
S
S
S

S
S
S
S

PEN, Penicillin; OXA, oxacillin; ERI, erytromycin; CLI, clindamycin; GEN, gentamicin; LEV, levoﬂoxacin; ENR, enroﬂoxacin; CIP, ciproﬂoxacin; CLO,
chloramphenicol; LNZ, linezolid; SUT, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim; TT, tetracyclin; DOX, doxycycline; VAN, vancomycin; R, resistant; I, interme-
diary; S, susceptible.
* Isolates resistant to oxacillin (methicillin) are to be reported as resistant to all beta-lactams antibiotics (Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute,
2008) therefore the four isolates were considered resistant to penicillin, meropenem, ceftriaxone and cephalothin
 Breakpoints were attributed according to CLSI (2005, 2008). The results were the same using both guidelines.
àBreakpoints were attributed according to CLSI (2005).
§Breakpoints were attributed according to CLSI (2008).

2

ª 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH • Zoonoses Public Health. 59 (2012) 1–3

G. de V. Aquino et al.

Prevalence of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococci on a Farm

pressure in the community may have contributed to the
differing prevalence at each site.

Sa˜o Paulo (FAPESP) during the development of
work.

this

Absence of MRCoNS found in the animals in this
study is corroborated by the absence of MRCoNS in food
animals reported by Bagcigil et al., 2007; but
is con-
tradicted by their prevalence in horses found in other
works, ranging from 42% to 82% (Vengust et al., 2006;
Bagcigil et al., 2007; Moodley and Guardabassi, 2009).
This discrepancy may be explained by the low (or even
absent) selective pressure from antimicrobials on the
Staphylococci population of animals in this work because
they were healthy and thus not routinely exposed to anti-
microbials.

The presence of MRCoNS in humans and their absence
in animals (it is important to note that the number of
humans beings tested was 13 while the number of animals
tested was 148, and thus one would expect to ﬁnd more
MRCoNS in animals, since more animals were tested)
raises an interesting question because cross-transmission
could be expected. Because only two MRCoNS species (S.
vitulinus and S. haemolyticus) were shown to be shared
between animals and humans in a previous work (Mood-
ley and Guardabassi, 2009), the host speciﬁcity of CNS
species could hamper human to animal transmission of
MRCoNS, explaining the zero prevalence in animals in
this work.

Although, in general, MRS are resistant to several anti-
microbials, the isolates of this work were not, except for
the strain S107 (resistant to eight antimicrobials). All iso-
lates presented different antimicrobial resistance patterns,
to a lesser or greater degree (Table 1). The different resis-
tance patterns indicate that the MRCoNS were not shared
between humans.

In conclusion, MRCoNS may be present in humans
associated with animals but not present in the animals.
MRCoNS colonization may not correlate between humans
and the animals associated with them. Selective pressure
outside of the farm and a lack of MRCoNS transmission
between humans and animals may be responsible for this
lack of correlation.

Acknowledgements

We thank M. V. F. Lemos (Departamento de Biologia
Aplicada a Agropecua´ria, Faculdade de Cieˆncias Agra´rias
e Veterina´rias, UNESP, Jaboticabal). We also thank the
farm staff for their assistance in collecting the samples in
this work.

G. de V. Aquino (process number 2008/03869-0) and
R.P. Maluta (process number 2008/00417-0) held scholar-
ships from Fundac¸a˜o de Amparo a` Pesquisa do Estado de

References

Bagcigil, F. L., A. Moodley, K. E. Baptiste, F. V. Jensen, and L.
Guardabassi, 2007: Occurrence, species distribution, antimi-
crobial resistance and clonality of methicillin – and erythro-
mycin – resistant Staphylococci in the nasal cavity of
domestic animals. Vet. Microbiol. 121, 307–315.

Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute 2005: Performance

Standards for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing. Docu-
ment M100-S15. NCCLS, Wayne, PA.

Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute 2008: Performance
Standards for Antimicrobial Disk and Dilution Susceptibility
Tests for Bacterial Isolated from Animals. Approved Stan-
dard. Document M31-A3. NCCLS, Wayne, PA.

van Duijkeren, E., A. T. Box, M. E. Heck, W. J. Wannet, and

A. C. Fluit, 2004a: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococci isolated
from animals. Vet. Microbiol. 103, 91–97.

van Duijkeren, E., M. J. H. M. Wolfhagen, A. T. A. Box, M. E.

O. C. Heck, W. J. B. Wannet, and A. C. Fluit, 2004b:
Human-to-dog transmission of methicillin-resistant Staphy-
lococcus aureus. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 10, 2235–2237.

Gortel, K., K. L. Campbell, I. Kakoma, T. Whittem, D. J. Scha-

effer, and R. M. Weisiger, 1999: Methicillin resistance
among Staphylococci isolated from dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 60,
1526–1530.

Juha´sz-Kaszanyitzky, E´ ., S. Ja´nosi, P. Somogyi, A. Da´n, L. van
der G. Bloois, E. van Duijkeren, and J. A. Wagenaar, 2007:
MRSA Transmission between Cows and Humans. Emerg.
Infect. Dis. 13, 630–632.

Lilenbaum, W., E. L. C. Nunes, and M. A. I. Azeredo, 1998:
Prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility of Staphylococci
isolated from the skin surface of clinically normal cats. Lett.
Appl. Microbiol. 27, 224–228.

Maluta, R. P., A. E. Stella, E. C. Rigobelo, A. C. de Oliveira,
M. V. F. Lemos, and F. A. de A´ vila, 2010: Prevalence and
antimicrobial resistance patterns of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococci (MRS) isolated in a Veterinary Teaching Hos-
pital in Brazil. Afr J Microbiol Res 4, 1879–1883.

Moodley, A., and L. Guardabassi, 2009: Clonal spread of meth-

icillin-resistant coagulase-negative Staphylococci among
horses, personnel and environmental sites at equine facili-
ties. Vet. Microbiol. 137, 397–401.

Vengust, M., M. E. C. Anderson, J. Rousseau, and J. S. Weese,

2006: Methicillin-resistant staphylococcal colonization in
clinically normal dogs and horses in the community. Lett.
Appl. Microbiol. 43, 602–606.

Weese, J. S., T. Dacosta, L. Button, K. Goth, M. Ethier, and K.
Boehnke, 2004: Isolation of methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus from the enviroment in a veterinary teaching
hospital. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 18, 468–470.

ª 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH • Zoonoses Public Health. 59 (2012) 1–3

3

