Trop Anim Health Prod
DOI 10.1007/s11250-017-1251-6

REGULAR ARTICLES

Screening food-borne and zoonotic pathogens associated
with livestock practices in the Sumapaz region,
Cundinamarca, Colombia

Nelson E. Arenas 1 & Diego A. Abril 1 & Paola Valencia 1 & Surabhi Khandige 2 &
Carlos Yesid Soto 3 & Vilma Moreno-Melo 1

Received: 22 July 2016 /Accepted: 15 February 2017
# The Author(s) 2017. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract Hazardous practices regarding antibiotics misuse,
unsanitary milking procedures, and the commercial sales of
raw milk and unpasteurized dairy products are currently being
practiced by livestock farmers in the Sumapaz region
(Colombia). The purpose of this study was to screen for
food-borne and zoonotic pathogens associated with local live-
stock practices. We evaluated 1098 cows from 46 livestock
farms in the Sumapaz region that were selected by random. Of
the total population of cattle, 962 animals (88%) were tested
for bovine TB using a caudal-fold tuberculin test and 546
(50%) for brucellosis by a competitive ELISA. In the popula-
tion tested, 23 cows were positive for Brucella sp.
representing a 4.2% seroprevalence and no cases of bovine
tuberculosis were found. In addition, food-borne contamina-
tion with Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus was
assessed together with antibiotic susceptibility for ten different
antibiotics in milk samples from 16 livestock farms. We found
that 12 of the farms (75%) were contaminated with these food-
borne pathogens. Noteworthy, all of the isolated pathogenic
strains were resistant to multiple antibiotics, primarily to oxy-
tetracycline and erythromycin. Our findings suggest that

* Vilma Moreno-Melo

vilma@mail.unicundi.edu.co

1

Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, Universidad de Cundinamarca,
Diagonal 18 No. 20-29, Fusagasugá, Cundinamarca 252211,
Colombia

2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of

Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M, Denmark

3 Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, Universidad Nacional

de Colombia, Carrera 30, No. 45-03, Ciudad Universitaria,
Bogotá, Colombia

livestock products could be a source of exposure to Brucella
and multidrug-resistant E. coli and S. aureus strains as a result
of unhygienic livestock practices in the Sumapaz region.
Training in good farming practices is the key to improving
safety in food production.

Introduction

Prevailing food regulations demand high-quality assurance
and safety in the production chain (Grace 2015). Meeting
these global safety standards mandates significant changes in
farming practices and animal husbandry (Van Boeckel et al.
2015). The Colombian Agriculture and Livestock Institute
(Spanish abbreviation: ICA) is the local authority that assesses
compliance with international guidelines, infectious disease
control, and compulsory epidemiological registration. The
ICA’s programs include the screening and epidemiological
surveillance of zoonotic diseases associated with livestock
and agricultural farming. These programs are based on good
farming practices (GFPs) for animal production food safety
which are procedures formulated to contribute to sustainable
livestock production in the country (Roess et al. 2015). In fact,
GFPs have demonstrated excellent results in farm productivity
and have contributed to local development, the maintenance
of good animal health and increasing economic profits for
farmers (Crowder and Reganold 2015). GFPs have been fo-
cused on the control of brucellosis and tuberculosis (TB),
which are considered to have the greatest impact among zoo-
notic diseases in Colombia and South America.

Zoonotic disease eradication includes screening programs
and the epidemiological surveillance of food-borne pathogens
as key strategic activities (Grace 2015). In the Sumapaz re-
gion, livestock farming is the central economic activity; it is
performed empirically by local farmers without an in-depth
understanding of GFPs. Epidemiological surveillance is im-
portant because the commercialization of unpasteurized dairy
products can pose a threat to human public health. In addition,
zoonotic infections, such as brucellosis and TB, are common,
insidious, and persistent problems for livestock farmers in
general in developing countries (Aznar et al. 2014; Roess
et al. 2015). Despite control measures and sanitation efforts,
zoonotic disease outbreaks have been reported in Colombia
(Morales and Combariza 2004; González et al. 2007; Tique
et al. 2009, 2010). In 2013, brucellosis was the most common
zoonotic infection in Colombia; 12,000 cases are reported
annually and 343 cases of these occur in the Sumapaz region
and neighboring areas. Consequently, a decrease in milk pro-
duction from 168,216 L/day in 2007 to 117,538 L/day in 2009
(30% decrease) has been reported in the Sumapaz region. In
contrast, the bovine TB prevalence has been estimated to be
less than 1% in Colombia (De Waard 2010). Along with its
economic impact, the morbidity and mortality associated with
such zoonotic infections such as brucellosis and bovine TB
are also relatively unknown or underestimated by livestock
farmers and government institutions. Our purpose was to de-
velop a screening and sanitation program in accordance with
GFPs that would involve local farmers in the control of zoo-
notic and food-borne diseases such as brucellosis and TB to
improve animal health.

Material and methods

Study area and sampling

A cross-sectional study was performed from January 2014 to
June 2015 to detect and identify zoonotic and food-borne
pathogens associated with livestock practices in the
Sumapaz region. With an area of 1808 km2, the Sumapaz
region is located in the south of Cundinamarca (representing
8% of the province) and is delimited by Tequendama and
Soacha in the north, the province of Tolima in the south,
Bogotá in the east, and Alto Magdalena in the west (Fig. 1).
Livestock farming and animal husbandry is an important eco-
nomic activity in this region; thus, 46 livestock farms were
randomly selected from Fusagasugá, Silvania, Tibacuy,
Arbeláez, Cabrera, Pandi, and Pasca municipalities.
Paradoxically, livestock farming is performed empirically
without quality assurance schemes and marketing of raw milk
and unpasteurized dairy products is currently performed in
these municipalities. Five breeds of cattle have been recorded
including a local breed (named BCreole^), Holstein, Pardo,

Trop Anim Health Prod

Normande, and Cebu (called BMestizo^). One thousand
ninety-eight animals (spread over 46 livestock farms random-
ly selected in the Sumapaz area) were screened for bovine TB
and brucellosis. Of the total population of cattle, 962 animals
(88%) were tested for bovine TB and 546 (50%) for brucello-
sis. Out of 46 livestock farms, 16 were based on milk produc-
tion. In each of them, ten milk samples were aseptically col-
lected from different random selected cows and were pooled
in a bulk tank for further microbiological analyses. In addition,
nutrition analysis in raw milk pools was determined using an
ultrasonic milk analyzer (LactoScan system, Milkotronic,
Ltd., Nova Zagora, Bulgaria) testing: the protein percentage,
fat percentage, milk solid nonfat, density, pH, lactose percent-
age, and total solid percentage.

Bovine tuberculosis and brucellosis detection

For Brucella diagnosis, 10 mL of blood was collected in ster-
ile vacutainer tubes and stored at 4 °C until required. Samples
were centrifuged at 3000×g for 10 min and processed accord-
ing to guidelines (ICA 2010). A competitive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Boehringer Ingelheim,
Uppsala, Sweden) was performed consistently with the previ-
ously standardized technique (Rivera et al. 2003). Results
were expressed as percent inhibition by each serum consider-
ing a value ≥30% was interpreted as a positive and <30% as
negative test. On the other hand, caudal-fold tuberculin tests
(CFTs; Thermofisher Scientific, Schlieren-Zurich,
Switzerland) were performed by ICA’s certified veterinarians
for TB screening. Briefly, the animals were injected intrader-
mally with purified protein derivative (PPD) tuberculin, and
the injection site was measured 72 h later. Hypersensitivity
reactions, such as swelling or discoloration, were interpreted
according to ICA standard procedures (ICA 2004).

Bacterial identification

For microbiological tests, approximately 15 mL of pooled
milk was aseptically collected in sterile tubes and stored at
4 °C. Milk dilutions were streaked in LB plates and incubated
at 37 °C to obtain single colonies. Colonies were isolated and
classified according to morphological features, shape, and
Gram staining. Bacterial identification was performed by
using phenotypic methods based on biochemical reactions
and bacterial metabolism (sugar fermentation, indole, meth-
yl-red, Voges-Proskauer, motility, gas production, and citrate
tests) for Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Bacterial
isolates were tested for antibiotic susceptibility to ten drugs
that are commonly prescribed for veterinary use.
Antimicrobial susceptibility tests were performed by Kirby-
Bauer disk diffusion method in Mueller-Hinton agar plates
and interpreted according to the guidelines of the National
Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards (NCCLS) and

Trop Anim Health Prod

Fig. 1 Geographical location of
the Sumapaz region in
Cundinamarca, Colombia.
Shadow area inside the circle
represents the location of the
Sumapaz area

national regulations for antibiotic use in livestock practices
(Ministerio de Salud y Proteccion Social 2013). Eighty per-
cent of the veterinary antibiotics selected (8/10) have broad
antibacterial activity against Gram-negative and Gram-
positive bacteria involving different drug mechanisms. Data
about current livestock practices were assessed with regard to
milking routines, tool sterilization, and drug records gathered
from livestock smallholders participating in this study.

Ethical considerations

All cattle tests followed the laws and regulations recommend-
ed by the European Communities Council Directive of
November 24, 1986 (86/609/EEC) and were in agreement
with the ICA’s regulations. Furthermore, in all cases, the live-
stock farmers were informed verbally about the procedures,
risks, and benefits associated with participation in the study.

Results

To evaluate zoonotic disease control in the livestock farms
(n = 46), bovine TB and brucellosis were screened through
CFTs and competitive ELISA, respectively.

No cases of bovine TB were detected and 23 (4.2%) sera
from clinically normal cattle were positive for brucellosis.
Nineteen of the brucellosis cases are presented in Table 1.
The animals represented were all female and belonged to the
following breeds: Brahman (n = 9), Cross-bred (n = 3), Bon
(n = 3), Holstein (n = 1), Normande (n = 1), Creole (n = 1),

and unknown (n = 1). All sera showed inhibition levels be-
tween 47 and 96% in the competitive ELISA tests.
Furthermore, 30 livestock farmers who currently performed

Table 1 Characteristics of brucellosis infection in cattle. Inhibition
≥30% indicated a positive test, and inhibition <30% indicated a
negative test. The results were obtained with competitive ELISA

Location Municipality Breed

% inhibition Age (months)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

Arbeláez
Arbeláez
Arbeláez
Arbeláez
Arbeláez
Arbeláez
Arbeláez
Arbeláez
Arbeláez
Arbeláez
Arbeláez
Fusagasugá
Fusagasugá
Fusagasugá
Fusagasugá
Fusagasugá
Pasca
Pasca
Pandi

Brahman
Brahman
Brahman
Brahman
Brahman
Brahman
Brahman
Brahman
Brahman
Cross-breed
nd
Cross-breed
Cross-breed
Bon Cebu
Bon
Bon Cebu
Holstein
Normand
Creole

54
64
47
47
60
48
50
48
56
89
>30
96
96
75
47
50
96
>30
53

nd data non-determined

25
27
45
43
45
41
29
24
47
64
nd
104
30
37
58
30
55
nd
72

milking routines on the farms with index cases (brucellosis)
were also tested, but were found to be negative for brucellosis
and bovine TB.

To assess milk quality and safety before GFP achievement,
nutritional composition and microbiological tests were per-
formed in the 16 milk pooled samples. Nutrition analysis did
not show any significant differences in nutritional content be-
tween samples (data not shown). Nevertheless, the majority of
milk pooled samples showed microbial contamination. Thus,
cultures of four pooled samples were negative, while 12 of the
milk samples (75%) indicated bacterial contamination with
Staphylococcus aureus (n = 1) and Escherichia coli (n = 11).
None of the bacterial isolates displayed sensitivity to any of
the tested antibiotics (other than enrofloxacin), instead most of
them showed extended drug resistance. All E. coli isolates
presented multiple resistance to at least four different antibi-
otics in 90% (n = 11) of all cases. The most concerning find-
ings were that four of the examined E. coli isolates (33.3%)
were resistant to seven of the tested antibiotics, while two
other E. coli isolates (16.7%) showed resistance to five to
six antimicrobial drugs (Table 2). A single S. aureus isolate
was found to be resistant to oxytetracycline (OXY) and eryth-
romycin (ERY). Antibiotic resistance involving DOX and/or
ERY was often detected in 11 (92%) strains; ten strains
showed amoxicillin (AMX) resistance (83%) and eight of
the bacterial isolates (67%) showed resistance to fosfomycin
(FOF), OXY, and gentamicin (GEN) (Fig. 2). Overall, this
study reports a very high prevalence of multidrug-resistant
strains of E. coli involving livestock farming in the Sumapaz
region. The milk contamination observed in the course of our
study could be explained by the fact that 91% of livestock
farmers performed milking routines manually without gloves
and missing knowledge about possible sources of bacterial
contamination. These practices did not include the sterilization
and cleaning of milking tools, and 55% of the farmers includ-
ed in our study lacked proper records regarding the adminis-
tration of drugs and medicines to their livestock herds.

Discussion

The adoption of GFP guidelines represents an important step
in the development of sustainable agriculture in the Sumapaz
region (Cundinamarca, Colombia). Many livestock farmers
have a low income and lack required knowledge about
GFPs, which leads to low milk productivity and poor quality
together with commercial value loss. Therefore, GFP training
is essential for helping farmers achieve high-quality standards
and develop sustainable livestock practices (Leibler et al.
2016; Abbasi and Abbasi2016 ). In Colombia, antibiotic use
in livestock farming has not been considered a major public
health problem in terms of emerging antibiotic-resistant
strains. The lack of adequate data and thorough surveillance

Trop Anim Health Prod

make the true impact of antibiotic use in livestock challenging
to assess (Landers et al. 2012). Thus, multidrug antibiotic
resistance in farming practices might be associated with anti-
biotic misuse and unsanitary farming practices, as has been
reported in Monteria, Colombia (Máttar et al. 2009). In this
study, E. coli and S. aureus were detected in raw milk; their
presence was associated with poor milking practices and the
cattle’s exposure to the indiscriminate use of veterinary drugs.
Thus, the milking routine is a key determinant of quality milk
production. Unsanitary handling of the cow’s udder during
milking is a frequent source of contamination with
S. aureus, which is recognized as a microbial contaminant
(Kateete et al. 2013). GFP guidelines address those problems
through the implementation of protocols through which live-
stock farmers can control environmental bacteria such as
E. coli and S. aureus, which primarily tend to colonize the teat
skin (Azevedo et al. 2016).

The emergence of antibiotic-resistant and multidrug-
resistant bacterial contaminants in milk is further complicated
by the sale of raw milk to local consumers or small-scale
traders in the Sumapaz region. In other settings, the marketing
of raw milk has been associated with major health problems,
such as the emergence of E. coli O157:H7 strains (Addo et al.
2011; Mhone et al. 2011; Rasheed et al. 2014; Amagliani et al.
2016). Concerning antibiotic susceptibility, OXY, ERY, and
AMX do not seem to play a significant selective role against
microbial contamination in milk; rather, they contribute to
increased bacterial resistance or create selective pressure for
microorganisms that are already resistant to those drugs.
Therefore, livestock farmers should be trained in sustainable
livestock production, particularly with regard to antibiotic
stewardship (Chang et al. 2015). Contaminated milk might
lead to the emergence of strains with extended antibiotic re-
sistance and the potential to spread among human and animal
populations, which could influence the farm production envi-
ronment (Haran et al. 2012; Iweriebor et al. 2015).

Screening for other food-borne pathogens, such as Brucella
abortus and Mycobacterium bovis—the causative agents of
brucellosis and bovine TB, respectively—was also performed
in this study. Twenty-three cases of brucellosis and none of
bovine TB were detected. Brucellosis is a zoonotic infection
that is contagious to humans and requires an expensive and
prolonged treatment regimen. In Colombia, brucellosis has
been recognized as a considerable challenge faced by live-
stock farmers. The bovine brucellosis incidence in the
Caribbean region has been estimated to range from 3.7 to
12.7% in animals and farms (Aznar et al. 2014).
Approximately 4% of humans working in slaughterhouses in
Tolima have been diagnosed with brucellosis (Morales and
Combariza 2004). Additionally, the real prevalence of brucel-
losis might be underestimated in Colombia because of a lack
of proper registration and a need for specific and sensitive
diagnostic methods (Higgins et al. 2012). Second, no cases

Trop Anim Health Prod

Table 2 Detection of multidrug
antibiotic resistance in pathogens
(E. coli and S. aureus) associated
with livestock farming in the
Sumapaz region. The thresholds
for minimum inhibitory
concentrations were assessed
using local regulations for
livestock farming

Number of isolates
(%)

Number of antibiotics showing
resistance

Antimicrobial resistance pattern (number of
isolates)

1 (8.3)
3 (25)

2 (16.7)

2 (16.7)
4 (33.3)

2
4

5

6
7

OXY, ERY (1)
AMX, GEN, ERY, DOX (1)
FOF, AMX, ERY, DOX (1)
FOF, SXT, NOR, DOX (1)
SXT, AMX, GEN, ERY, DOX (1)
FOF, AMX, OXY, ERY, DOX (1)
FOF, AMX, OXY, GEN, ERY, DOX (2)
SXT, AMX, CIP, OXY, GEN, ERY, DOX (1)
FOF, SXT, AMX, OXY, GEN, ERY, DOX (3)

FOF fosfomycin, SXT trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, AMX amoxicillin, CIP ciprofloxacin, OXY oxytetracy-
cline, NOR norfloxacin, EFX enrofloxacin, GEN gentamicin, ERY erythromycin, DOX doxycycline

of bovine TB were detected, which seems to reflect the prog-
ress of the Bovine Tuberculosis Eradication Program in
Colombia, which has maintained the bovine TB prevalence
below 1% (De Waard 2010). However, because the CFT is a
screening test, negative results cannot be considered absolute
proof of the absence of bovine TB in a given cow or herd.
Thus, CFT only provides an indication if an animal develops
an immune response to the antigen for M. bovis (De Kantor
and Ritacco 2006).

Epidemiological surveillance of livestock production
might support the government’s planning initiatives and pol-
icies, programs, and procedures to protect animal and human
health (Henrioud 2011; Donado-Godoy et al. 2015). The
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development in Colombia
assesses some economic benefits for livestock farmers who
implement GFPs. Thus, GFP acceptance has been difficult
to promote among small-holder farmers in the Sumapaz re-
gion because of the initial economic investment, the lack of
knowledge about cost-benefits, the need for follow-up

registration, and a lack of understanding about practices.
Once livestock farmers accepted the advantages, it was possi-
ble to optimize the production and commercialization of dairy
products and promote ecological practices (Seufert et al.
2012). Problems regarding the commercialization of contam-
inated dairy products and raw milk or infected cattle still per-
sist in the Sumapaz region. Thus, we expect that the training
and implementation of GFPs would contribute to the develop-
ment of an agriculture sustainability model for livestock
farmers in the Sumapaz region.

In conclusion, screening of food-borne and zoonotic path-
ogens is pivotal to control accurately potential outbreaks in the
Sumapaz region. Although TB cases were not identified, bru-
cellosis remains as a frequent zoonotic disease (4.2% sero-
prevalence). Occurrence of multidrug-resistant E. coli strains
is relatively high and could represent a source of infection for
farmers and consumers of dairy products. Further studies to
identify the molecular basis of antibiotic resistance are
required.

Fig. 2 Frequency of antibiotic resistance of each drug tested in E. coli and S. aureus isolates. FOF fosfomycin, SXT trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
AMX amoxicillin, CIP ciprofloxacin, OXYoxytetracycline, NOR norfloxacin, EFX enrofloxacin, GEN gentamicin, ERYerythromycin, DOX doxycycline

AMX, amoxicillin; CFTs, caudal-fold tuberculin tests; CIP,
ciprofloxacin; DOX, doxycycline; EFX, enrofloxacin;
ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; ERY, erythro-
mycin; FOF, fosfomycin; GEN, gentamicin; GFPs, good
farming practices; ICA, Colombian Agriculture and
Livestock Institute; NCCLS, National Committee for
Clinical Laboratory Standards; NOR, norfloxacin; OXY, oxy-
tetracycline; PPD, purified protein derivative; SXT,
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; TB, tuberculosis

Acknowledgements The authors would like to acknowledge the
SERVIGAN-Sábana LTDA Laboratory for sample testing. We also
would like to acknowledge all of the livestock farmers who generously
participated in this study and Natalia Pardo, Juan F. Morales, and Juan C.
López for technical support. We thank Adriana Paola Bendek and Michal
Beker for proofreading this manuscript. This project was funded by the
Committee of Livestock Farmers from the Sumapaz region (COMIGAN-
Sumapaz), Colombian Association for Science Advance (Spanish abbre-
viation: ACAC), and Universidad de Cundinamarca. Overall project is
knowledge transfer in Good Farming Practices to livestock farmers from
the Sumapaz region, Fusagasugá, Cundinamarca.

Authors’ contributions Conceived and designed the experiments:
VMM and NEA. Performed sampling: DAA and PV. Analyzed the data:
NEA, CYS, and SK. Wrote the paper: NEA, CYS, SK, and VMM.

Compliance with ethical standards All cattle tests followed the laws
and regulations recommended by the European Communities Council
Directive of November 24, 1986 (86/609/EEC) and were in agreement
with the ICA’s regulations.

Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link
to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

References

Abbasi, T. and Abbasi, S.A., 2016. Reducing the global environmental
impact of livestock production: the minilivestock option. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 112, 1754–1766.

Addo, K.K., Mensah, G.I., Aning, K.G., Nartey, N., Nipah, G.K., Bonsu,
C., Akyeh, M.L. and Smits, H.L., 2011. Microbiological quality and
antibiotic residues in informally marketed raw cow milk within the
coastal savannah zone of Ghana. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, 16, 227–232.

Amagliani, G., Petruzzelli, A., Carloni, E., Tonucci, F., Foglini, M.,
Micci, E., Ricci, M., Di Lullo, S., Rotundo, L. and Brandi, G.,
2016. Presence of Escherichia coli O157, Salmonella spp., and
Listeria monocytogenes in raw ovine milk destined for cheese pro-
duction and evaluation of the equivalence between the analytical
methods applied. Foodborne Pathogens and Disease, 13, 626–632.
Azevedo, C., Pacheco, D., Soares, L., Romão, R., Moitoso, M.,
Maldonado, J., Guix, R. and Simões, J., 2016. Prevalence of

Trop Anim Health Prod

contagious and environmental mastitis-causing bacteria in bulk tank
milk and its relationships with milking practices of dairy cattle herds
in São Miguel Island (Azores). Tropical animal health and produc-
tion, 48, 451–459.

Aznar, M.N., Samartino, L.E., Humblet, M.F. and Saegerman, C., 2014.
Bovine brucellosis in Argentina and bordering countries: update.
Transboundary and Emerging Diseases, 61, 121–133.

Chang, Q., Wang, W., Regev-Yochay, G., Lipsitch, M. and Hanage, W.P.,
2015. Antibiotics in agriculture and the risk to human health: how
worried should we be?. Evolutionary Applications, 8, 240–247.

Crowder, D.W. and Reganold, J.P., 2015. Financial competitiveness of
organic agriculture on a global scale. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112, 7611–
7616.

De Kantor, I.N. and Ritacco, V., 2006. An update on bovine tuberculosis
programmes in Latin American and Caribbean countries. Veterinary
Microbiology, 112, 111–118.

De Waard, J.H., 2010. ¿Ordeñando micobacterias del ganado? Impacto
económico y en salud de Tuberculosis bovina y Paratuberculosis en
Colombia. Revista MVZ Córdoba, 15, 2037–2040.

Donado-Godoy, P., Castellanos, R., León, M., Arevalo, A., Clavijo, V.,
Bernal, J., León, D., Tafur, M.A., Byrne, B.A., Smith, W.A. and
Perez-Gutierrez, E., 2015. The establishment of the Colombian
Integrated Program for Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance
(COIPARS): A pilot project on poultry farms, slaughterhouses and
retail market. Zoonoses Public Health, 62, 58–69.

González, M., Ríos, R. and Mattar, S., 2007. Prevalencia de bacterias
asociadas a la infertilidad infecciosa en bovinos de Montería,
Colombia. Revista MVZ Córdoba, 12, 1028–1035.

Grace, D., 2015. Food safety in low and middle income countries.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 12, 10490–10507.

Haran, K.P., Godden, S.M., Boxrud, D., Jawahir, S., Bender, J.B. and
Sreevatsan, S., 2012. Prevalence and characterization of
Staphylococcus aureus,
including methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus, isolated from bulk tank milk from
Minnesota dairy farms. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 50, 688–
695.

Henrioud, A.N., 2011. Towards sustainable parasite control practices in
livestock production with emphasis in Latin America. Veterinary
Parasitology, 180, 2–11.

Higgins, J., Stuber, T., Quance, C., Edwards, W.H., Tiller, R.V., Linfield,
T., Rhyan, J., Berte, A. and Harris, B., 2012. Molecular epidemiol-
ogy of Brucella abortus isolates from cattle, elk, and bison in the
United States, 1998 to 2011. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, 78, 3674–3684.

ICA, 2004. Colombian Agriculture and Livestock Institute. Law 1513,
Sanitary assessment for prevention, control and erradication of bo-
vine tuberculosis in Colombia. Issued on July 15th, 2004. Available
in: https://www.ptp.com.co/documentos/Resolucion%201513.pdf
Accessed 12 March 2016.

ICA, 2010. Colombian Agriculture and Livestock Institute. Bovine bru-
cellosis: Prevention, diagnosis and control. Bogota, Colombia.
Fourth Edition. 13 p. In: http://www.ica.gov.co/Areas/Pecuaria/
Servicios/Enfermedades-Animales/Brucelosis-Bovina-(1)/
Brucelosis-Bovina4.aspx Accessed 10 March 2016.

Iweriebor, B., Iwu, C., Obi, L., Nwodo, U. and Okoh, A., 2015. Multiple
antibiotic resistances among Shiga toxin producing Escherichia coli
O157 in feces of dairy cattle farms in Eastern Cape of South Africa.
BMC Microbiology, 15, 213.

Kateete, D.P., Kabugo, U., Baluku, H., Nyakarahuka, L., Kyobe, S.,
Okee, M., Najjuka, C.F. and Joloba, M.L., 2013. Prevalence and
Antimicrobial Susceptibility Patterns of Bacteria from Milkmen
and Cows with Clinical Mastitis in and around Kampala, Uganda,
PLoS One, 8, e63413.

Trop Anim Health Prod

Landers, T.F., Cohen, B., Wittum, T.E. and Larson, E.L., 2012. A review
of antibiotic use in food animals: perspective, policy, and potential.
Public Health Reports, 127, 4–22.

Leibler, J.H., Dalton, K., Pekosz, A., Gray, G.C. and Silbergeld, E.K.,
2016. Epizootics in industrial livestock production: preventable
gaps in biosecurity and biocontainment. Zoonoses Public Health.
doi:10.1111/zph.12292

Máttar, S., Calderón, A., Sotelo, D., Sierra, M. and Tordecilla, G., 2009.
Detección de antibióticos en leches: un problema de salud pública.
Revista de Salud Pública, 11, 579–590.

Mhone, T.A., Matope, G. and Saidi, P.T., 2011. Aerobic bacterial, coli-
form, Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus counts of raw and
processed milk from selected smallholder dairy farms of Zimbabwe.
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 151, 223–228.

Morales, D.F. and Combariza D.A., 2004. Seroprevalencia de brucelosis
en trabajadores de mataderos de municipios del Tolima (Colombia).
Revista Ciencias de la Salud, 2, 15–23.

Ministerio de Salud y Proteccion Social, 2013. Law 1382 Maximum
limits for the use of veterinary medicines in food from animal origin.
Issued on 2nd May, 2013. 15 p. In: https://www.minsalud.gov.co/
Normatividad_Nuevo/Resoluci%C3%B3n%201382%20de%
202013.pdf Accesed 15 May 2016.

Rasheed, M.U., Thajuddin, N., Ahamed, P., Teklemariam, Z. and Jamil,
K., 2014. Antimicrobial drug resistance in strains of Escherichia coli
isolated from food sources. Revista do Instituto de Medicina
Tropical de São Paulo, 56, 341–346.

Rivera, D., Rueda, O., Calderón, C., Marino, O., Gall, D. and Nielsen, K.,
2003. Evaluación comparativa del método inmunoenzimático
indirecto en leche para la detección de bovinos infectados con
Brucella abortus, en hatos del departamento de Cundinamarca,
Colombia. Scientific and Technical Review of the Office
International des Epizooties (Paris) 22, 1065–1075.

Roess, A. A., Winch, P. J., Akhter, A., Afroz, D., Ali, N. A., Shah, R.,
Begum, N., Seraji, H. R., El Arifeen, S., Darmstadt, G. L., Baqui,
A. H. and the Bangladesh Projahnmo Study Group 2015.
Household animal and human medicine use and animal husbandry
practices in rural Bangladesh: Risk factors for emerging zoonotic
disease and antibiotic resistance. Zoonoses Public Health, 62,
569–578.

Seufert, V., Ramankutty, N. and Foley, J.A., 2012. Comparing the yields

of organic and conventional agriculture, Nature, 485, 229–232.

Tique, V., González, M. and Mattar, S., 2009. Seroprevalencia de
Brucella abortus en bovinos del departamento de Cordoba.
Revista U.D.C.A Actualidad & Divulgación Científica 12, 51–59.
Tique, V., Daza, E., Álvarez, J. and Mattar, S., 2010. Seroprevalencia de
Brucella abortus y ocurrencia de Brucella melitensis en caprinos y
en ovinos de Cesar y Sucre. Revista U.D.C.A Actualidad &
Divulgación Científica, 13, 133–139.

Van Boeckel, T.P., Brower, C., Gilbert, M., Grenfell, B.T., Levin, S.A.,
Robinson, T.P., Teillant, A. and Laxminarayan, R., 2015. Global
trends in antimicrobial use in food animals. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 112, 5649–5654.

