Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916
Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.9/January-2016/12.pdf

RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access

Prevalence and characterization of multi-drug resistant Salmonella 
Enterica serovar Gallinarum biovar Pullorum and Gallinarum from 

chicken

Md. Shafiullah Parvej, K. H. M. Nazmul Hussain Nazir, M. Bahanur Rahman, Mueena Jahan, 

Mohammad Ferdousur Rahman Khan and Marzia Rahman

Department of Microbiology and Hygiene, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Bangladesh Agricultural University, 

Mymensingh-2202, Bangladesh.

Corresponding author: Marzia Rahman, e-mail: marzia_micro@yahoo.com,

MSP: drparvejbd@gmail.com, KHMNHN: nazir@bau.edu.bd, MBR: bahanurr@gmail.com,

Received: 01-08-2015, Revised: 07-12-2015, Accepted: 12-12-2015, Published online: 20-01-2016

MJ: tanha_vet@yahoo.com, MFRK: frkhanbau80@yahoo.com

doi: 10.14202/vetworld.2016.65-70 How to cite this article: Parvej MS, Nazir KHMNH, Rahman MB, Jahan M, Khan MFR, 
Rahman M (2016) Prevalence and characterization of multi-drug resistant Salmonella Enterica serovar Gallinarum biovar 
Pullorum and Gallinarum from chicken, Veterinary World 9(1): 65-70.

Abstract

Aim: Salmonella is an important zoonotic pathogen responsible for animal and human diseases. The aim of the present 
study was to determine the prevalence and stereotyping of Salmonella isolates isolated from apparently healthy poultry. 
Furthermore, the clonal relatedness among the isolated Salmonella serovars was assessed.
Materials and Methods: A total of 150 cloacal swab samples from apparently healthy chickens were collected, and were 
subjected for the isolation and identification of associated Salmonella organisms. The isolated colonies were identified and 
characterized on the basis of morphology, cultural characters, biochemical tests, slide agglutination test, polymerase chain 
reaction, and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). Antibiotic sensitivity patterns were also investigated using commonly 
used antibiotics.
Results: Of the 150 samples, 11 (7.33%) produced characteristics pink colony with black center on XLD agar medium, and 
all were culturally and biochemically confirmed to be Salmonella. All possessed serovar-specific gene SpeF and reacted 
uniformly with group D antisera, suggesting that all of the isolates were Salmonella Enterica serovar Gallinarum, biovar 
Pullorum and/or Gallinarum. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing revealed that 54.54% of the isolated Salmonella Enterica 
serovars were highly sensitive to ciprofloxacin, whereas the 81.81% isolates were resistant to amoxycillin, doxycycline, 
kanamycin, gentamycin, and tetracycline. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis of the XbaI-digested genomic DNA exhibited 
identical banding patterns, suggesting that the multidrug resistant Salmonella Enterica serovars occurring in commercial 
layers are highly clonal in Bangladesh.
Conclusion: The present study was conducted to find out the prevalence of poultry Salmonella in layer chicken and to 
find out the clonal relationship among them. The data in this study suggest the prevalence of Salmonella Enterica, which is 
multidrug resistant and highly clonal for commercial layers of Bangladesh.
Keywords: polymerase chain reaction, pulsed field gel electrophoresis, Salmonella, SpeF gene.
Introduction

The  genus  Salmonella  is  phylogenically  clus-
tered in the family of Enterobacteriaceae [1,2]. The 
most Salmonella is motile, with the exception of the 
poultry-specific  serovars  of  Salmonella  Gallinarium 
and  Salmonella Pullorum [2].  Salmonella is consid-
ered  one  of  the  most  common  causes  of  foodborne 
human  infections  worldwide  [3].  The  most  charac-
teristic feature of Salmonella is its wide host range, 
which  comprises  most  animal  species  including  all 
mammals, birds, and cold-blooded animals in addition 
to humans. Salmonella is one of the most important 

Copyright: Parvej, et al. Open Access. This article is distributed under 
the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  4.0  International 
License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),  which 
permits  unrestricted  use,  distribution,  and  reproduction  in  any 
medium,  provided  you  give  appropriate  credit  to  the  original 
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons 
Public  Domain  Dedication  waiver  (http://creativecommons.org/
publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this 
article, unless otherwise stated.

Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

pathogens responsible for human food poisoning in the 
developed world, where chicken and chicken products 
are widely considered to be significant sources for this 
organism.  Therefore,  Salmonella  has  been  isolated 
from a range of foods in almost all country in which 
it has been investigated [4]. Annual estimation of the 
incidence of nontyphoidal salmonellosis in the world 
is 1.3 billion, and annual death is estimated to 3 mil-
lion cases [5]. The poultry population in Bangladesh 
is  estimated  to  be  221.39  million  of  chickens  and 
41.23 million ducks [6]. About 50,000 chicken farms 
and 26,000 duck farms have already been set up in the 
private  sector  in  addition  to  the  Government  farms. 
At  present,  there  are  more  than  130  hatcheries  pro-
ducing 0.476 million day-old-chicks a week and about 
1 million commercial layer and broiler farms supply-
ing  0.6  million  kg  of  poultry  meat  and  9.9  million 
table eggs per weeks [7]. However, the advancement 
of the poultry industry is seriously hampered due to 
the outbreak of various infectious and non-infectious 
65

Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.9/January-2016/12.pdf

diseases. Among the bacterial diseases, Salmonellosis 
is  of  the  major  problem  [8].  Several  environmental 
factors including air, dirty litter, feed, water and vec-
tors, such as insects, humans, and rodents are respon-
sible for Salmonella infection in poultry farms [9-11]. 
Salmonella infection remains as a serious problem to 
public  health  significance  in  worldwide  and  causes 
substantial  economic  loss  resulting  from  mortality, 
morbidity, and poor growth with the hazard of trans-
mitting food poisoning with gastroenteritis to human 
and represents a serious problem for the food indus-
try [12] specially poultry meat. The possible source 
of Salmonella in poultry meat and eggs is due to cross 
contamination with feces. On the other hand, the emer-
gence  of  antibiotic-resistant  Salmonella  has  become 
a  serious  problem  worldwide.  Antimicrobials  are 
generally applied to treat diseases as well as growth 
promoter in poultry, exposing a large number of birds 
to frequently subtherapeutic concentrations [13] and 
leading  to  the  development  of  antimicrobial  resis-
tant  pathogens  that  are  subsequently  transferred  to 
humans through the food chain. Recently, the emer-
gence of antibiotic-resistant Salmonella has also led to 
the ineffective treatment of salmonellosis by several 
 antibiotics [14].

Salmonella serovars of poultry have been stud-
ied  by  most  authors  worldwide  [10,11,15]  and  in 
Bangladesh  [16-19].  However,  most  of  the  research 
works on Salmonella in poultry have been limited to 
phenotypic characterization. Data on molecular typ-
ing,  such  as  polymerase  chain  reaction  (PCR)  and 
pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) are useful for 
epidemiological  studies  and  is  of  value  in  identify-
ing the potential risk to public health associated with 
poultry meat, eggs and other poultry products.

The aim of the present study was to determine 
the prevalence and stereotyping (serotypes, PCR, anti-
microbial resistance patterns) of  Salmonella isolates 
from apparently healthy looking poultry. In addition, 
the clonal relatedness among the isolated Salmonella 
serovars was assessed.
Materials and Methods
Ethical approval

 All samples were collected as per standard sam-
ple  collection  procedure  without  harming  or  giving 
stress to any birds.
Sample collection and processing

To  isolate  the  Salmonellla  spp.  the  samples 
were  collected  from  commercial  poultry  farms  in 
Mymensingh region of Bangladesh. The droppings and 
cloacal  swabs  collected  from  birds  were  transferred 
to the laboratory at the Department of Microbiology 
and Hygiene, BAU, Mymensingh. The cloacal swabs 
were collected in a test tube containing nutrient broth 
followed  by  incubation  at  37°C  for  2  h. A  total  of 
150 samples were collected and analyzed. After tak-
ing necessary permission from the poultry farm own-
ers, the sample collection was performed as per the 
Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

guidelines set by the Department of Microbiology and 
Hygiene, BAU.
Isolation and identification of Salmonella

The  isolation  and  identification  of  Salmonella 
from  the  samples  were  performed  according  to  the 
conventional  bacteriological  methods  [20-24].  In 
short,  after  2  h  of  incubation  10  fold  dilutions  was 
performed using nutrient broth (Himedia, India), vor-
texed and 0.1 ml was spread onto Salmonella-Shigella 
agar,  followed  by  incubation  at  37°C  for  overnight, 
and the plates were examined for characteristics col-
ony produced by Salmonella spp.

The isolated colonies were identified and char-
acterized on the basis of morphology, cultural charac-
ters, biochemical tests, slide agglutination test, PCR, 
and PFGE. The isolated organisms were identified by 
Gram’s  staining  method  to  determine  their  staining 
characteristics,  morphology,  arrangement,  etc.  Five 
basic sugar fermentation (glucose, maltose) tests were 
performed to identify the organism. The pure colony 
was identified by indole test, Methyl red, VP test and 
with API  kit.  Then  the  motility  test  was  performed 
by hanging drop slide method and by culturing onto 
motility  indole  urea  (MIU)  media.  Slide  agglutina-
tion was performed using group D antisera (S and A 
Reagent Lab, Bankok, Thailand).
Amplification of Salmonella specific gene by PCR

To perform PCR bacterial DNA was extracted by 
boiling  method,  in  brief,  100  μl  distilled  water  was 
taken  in  an  eppendorf  tube,  a  pure  bacterial  colony 
from overnight cultured was mixed with the distilled 
water, boiled for 10 min and then immediately cooled 
on ice followed by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 
10  min.  The  supernatant  was  collected  and  used  as 
DNA template for PCR.

targetting 

performed 

the 
primer 
forward 
5´-TTAGCCGTCATTGCCCGGATT-3´  and  SpeF 
reverse  5´-ACGAGGTTTAATGACGTAGC-3´.  For 
the  detection  of  Salmonella  spp.  PCR  mixture  was 
prepared by the following method. To make 25 μl of 
PCR master mixture, 12.5 μl of 2 X Master mixtures 
(Promega, USA), 1 μl of each primer (10 pmol/μl), 
4 μl of DNA template and remaining 6.5 μl deionized 
water were added in PCR tube. To amplify the SpeF, 
PCR reaction was performed in 25cycles with initial 
denaturation  92°C  for  5  min,  denaturation  92°C  for 
30 sec, annealing 50°C for 1 min, extension at 72°C 
for 3 min and a final extension at 72°C for 5 min. The 
amplified products were resolved in 1% agarose gel 
stained  with  ethidium  bromide,  electrophoresed  at 
100 volt and examined under UV transilluminator.
PFGE

Whole  agarose-embedded  genomic  DNA  from 
the  Salmonella  isolates  was  prepared.  PFGE  was 
carried  out  using  a  contour-clamped  homogeneous 
electrical field-DRII apparatus (Bio-Rad), according 
to  procedures  described  elsewhere  [25].  Genomic 
66

PCR 

was 

pair 

using 

SpeF 

Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.9/January-2016/12.pdf

DNA of the test strains was digested by XbaI restric-
tion  enzyme  (Gibco-BRL,  Gaithersburg,  MD),  and 
Salmonella Enterica serovar Braenderup was digested 
using  XbaI,  with  fragments  employed  as  molecular 
size markers. Restriction fragments were separated in 
1% pulsed-field-certified agarose in 0.5X TBE (Tris-
borate-ethylenediaminetetraacetic  acid)  buffer.  Post-
electrophoresis  gel-treatment  included  gel  stained 
and  de-stained.  The  DNA  was  visualized  using  a 
UV-transilluminator,  and  images  were  digitized  via 
a  one-dimensional  gel  documentation  system  (Bio-
Rad). The fingerprint pattern in the gel was analyzed 
using  a  computer  software  package,  Bionumeric 
(Applied  Maths,  Belgium).  The  fingerprint  patterns 
were subjected to typing based on banding similarity 
and dissimilarity, using the dice similarity coefficient 
and unweighted pair group method employing aver-
age  linkage  (UPGMA)  clustering,  as  recommended 
by the manufacturer. The results were graphically rep-
resented as a dendrogram.
Antimicrobial susceptibility test

The antimicrobial susceptibility tests of the iso-
lates were performed by disc diffusion method accord-
ing  to  CLSI  [26].  The  antibiotic  discs  impregnated 
with  ciprofloxacin  (5  mcg),  amoxycillin  (10  mcg), 
doxycycline  (30  mcg),  kanamycin  (30  mcg),  genta-
mycin (10 mcg), tetracycline (30 mcg) (Oxoid, UK) 
were used in this study.
Results

In  the  present  study  out  of  150  samples  col-
lected, eleven samples were identified as positive for 
Salmonella by conventional techniques, API 20E sys-
tem, serotyping and molecular methods. On S-S agar 
the  Salmonella  isolates  produced  translucent,  black, 
smooth,  small  round  colonies.  Microscopic  exam-
ination of Gram stain revealed Gram-negative, pink 
colored short rod-shaped bacteria, arranged either sin-
gle or paired. All of the test isolates were indole and 
V-P negative and Methyl Red test positive, fermented 
glucose and maltose and produced both acid and gas. 
The isolates were agglutinated with group D antise-
rum,  indicated  that  all  11  isolates  were  Salmonella 
Pullorum and/or Salmonella Gallinarum. All isolates 
were found to be non-motile characterized by forming 
the stab line without producing turbidity in the MIU 
medium. All the isolated Salmonella were confirmed 
as Salmonella Pullorum and/or Salmonella Gallinarum 
by PCR targeting SpeF gene. The SpeF genes specific 
2  kb  amplicon  sizes  (Figure-1)  were  successfully 
amplified in all isolates. In this study out of 150 cloa-
cal swabs, Salmonella Pullorum and Gallinarum were 
isolated from 5 (3.33%) and 6 (4.00%) birds and dif-
ferntiated based on biochemical characters. The bio-
vars Salmonella Gallinarum and Pullorum were dif-
ferentiated based on different sugar fermentation tests 
particularly  dulcitol  fermentation  test.  The  biovar, 
Gallinarum can ferment galactose and dulcitol. In our 
Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

study total 6 of the biovars fermented galactose and 
dulcitol and 5 isolates were found non-fermenter. All 
5 isolates were fermented glucose and confirmed as 
Pullorum. All the isolated 11 Salmonella spp. was sub-
jected to PFGE to determine their clonal relatedness. 
The  XbaI-  restriction  enzyme  digested  the  genomic 
DNA and produced 16-20 fragments (Figure-2) ranged 
from 550 to 20-kb of molecular sizes. Cluster analy-
sis, which was performed with dendrograms (prepared 
by dice similarity coefficient and UPGMA clustering 
methods),  revealed  a  single  cluster  with  100%  sim-
ilarity  coefficient  (Figure-2).  Antimicrobial  suscep-
tibility test using six drugs  revealed that 54.54% of 
the isolated Salmonella Enterica serovars were highly 
sensitive  to  ciprofloxacin,  whereas  81.81%  isolates 
were resistant to amoxycillin, doxycycline, kanamy-
cin, gentamycin, and tetracycline.
Discussion

Salmonella  Gallinarum 

Salmonella 
Pullorum are non-motile pathogens that infect poultry 
and other galliform birds [27]. Salmonella Gallinarum 
is  responsible  for  fowl  typhoid,  and  Salmonella 

and 

Figure-1:  Lane  1:  1-kb  DNA  ladder,  Lane  3-13:  Tested 
samples positive for SpeF gene. Lane 2, 14 positive control, 
and Lane 15 negative control.

Figure-2:  Genomic  fingerprinting  of  Salmonella  isolated 
from poultry farm of Bangladesh Agriculture University in 
2013. The dendrogram was constructed by dice similarity 
coefficient and UPGMA clustering method using pulsed-field 
gel  electrophoresis  images  of  XbaI-  restriction  digested 
genomic  DNA  of  the  tested  Salmonella  strains;  the  scale 
bar at the top (left) indicates similarity coefficient.

67

Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.9/January-2016/12.pdf

Pullorum causes Pullorum disease, which is charac-
terized  by  white  diarrhea  in  chicks  [28].  SG,  found 
mostly  in  adult  birds,  can  also  affect  young  birds. 
Salmonella  Pullorum  may  infect  older  chickens, 
causing symptoms similar to those observed in fowl 
typhoid. Therefore, the proper identification of both 
Salmonella serovars is a very important from the epi-
demiological and control standpoints.

In  the  present  study,  we  identified  7.33% 
Salmonella in healthy layer chicken. The results are 
in agreement with [29] in Basrah city who found that 
the  overall  presence  of  Salmonella  spp.  was  9.2%. 
On the basis of cultural, serological, biochemical and 
molecular  characterization,  i.e.,  the  overall  preva-
lence of Salmonella in a cloacal swab of healthy lay-
ers  is  7.33%  in  Mymensingh  region  of  Bangladesh. 
Several authors reported that unlike other Salmonella 
serotypes, Pullorum and Gallinarum are not excreted 
extensively in feces [30]. Rahaman et al. [30] observed 
that  in  the  absence  of  clinical  signs  bacteriological 
assay  of  faecal  swabs  for  Pullorum  or  Gallinarum 
will not be easy. The most important observation in 
this study was the excretion of Salmonella Pullorum 
in healthy flocks which needs to be considered when 
flocks are stressed due to other factors as such excre-
tions can be a source of infection in multi-age farms. 
Salmonella Enterica serovar Pullorum and Gallinarum 
are  worldwide  a  poultry  pathogen  of  considerable 
economic importance, particularly a developing poul-
try  industry.  Salmonella  Enterica  serovar  Pullorum 
colonized both the ovary and the oviduct of hens and 
led to 6% of laid eggs being infected by Salmonella 
serovar Pullorum. The colonization of several differ-
ent sites of the reproductive tract suggests that serovar 
Pullorum may employ more than one mechanism of 
egg infection [18].

Although Salmonella Pullorum and Salmonella 
Gallinarum  cause  different  diseases  in  poultry,  they 
are  very  similar  in  genetically  and  phenotypically 
and  it  is  very  difficult  to  differentiate  these  two 
Salmonellae.  Salmonella  Gallinarum  is  responsible 
for  fowl  typhoid,  and  Salmonella  Pullorum  causes 
Pullorum disease, both are non-motile and contain the 
same somatic antigenic structure [31]. The differenti-
ation  between  Salmonella  Pullorum  and  Salmonella 
Gallinarum  is  very  important  from  epidemiological 
and  preventive  perspectives  and  also  for  the  devel-
opment of vaccine. As these two organisms are very 
similar, and cannot be distinguished by conventional 
and serological methods [31]. The biovars Salmonella 
Gallinarum  and  Pullorum  were  differentiated  in  the 
study  based  on  different  sugar  fermentation  tests 
particularly  dulcitol  fermentation  test.  This  biovar 
differentiation  concurs  with  the  report  of  Rahaman 
et al. [30] who differentiated biovar by the use of sug-
ars such as maltose, dulcitol and glucose.

Antibimicrbial  resistance  in  Salmonella  has 
assumed  alarming  proportion  worldwide  [32].  It  is 

associated with improper use of antimicrobial agent 
and has been reported to occur mostly in hosts that 
receive  the  antimicrobial  drugs.  In  this  study,  mul-
tidrug  resistance  Salmonella  were  isolated  might  be 
due to wide use of antibiotics in commercial poultry 
farms. Antibiogram using six drugs revealed 54.54% 
isolates  were  sensitive  to  ciprofloxacin  and  81.81% 
isolates  were  resistant  to  amoxycillin,  doxycycline, 
kanamycin,  gentamycin,  and  tetracycline.  Ramya 
et al. [33] described that the sensitivity of Salmonella 
spp. was 100% for ciprofloxacin followed by amoxy-
cillin  (82%).  Hyeon  et  al.  [34]  and  Roy  et  al.  [23] 
stated that in Salmonella the highest antibiotic resis-
tance observed was to erythromycin (100%) followed 
by streptomycin (22.2%) and tetracycline and chlor-
amphenicol (16.7%).

The  isolation  of  Salmonella  Gallinarum  and 
Salmonella  Pullorum  from  cloacal  swab  samples 
indicates the existence of fowl typhoid and Pullorum 
disease  in  intensive  poultry  farms  in  Mymensingh. 
All of the isolates showed identical restriction cleav-
age patterns in PFGE. The PFGE pattern of all the 
strains  matched  with  each  other  in  the  number  and 
position  of  the  DNA  fragments,  suggesting  genetic 
homogeneity. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis of the 
XbaI-digested genomic DNA exhibited banding pat-
terns  that  were  identical  (the  similarity  coefficient 
was 100%) for all the tested isolates which formed a 
tight cluster when dendrogram was constructed using 
the PFGE patterns, suggesting a high level of clonal 
relatedness among them. The data in this study sug-
gest the prevalence of Salmonella Enterica, which is 
multidrug resistant and highly clonal for commercial 
layers of Bangladesh.
Conclusion

Salmonella  is  regarded  as  the  major  bacterial 
foodborne pathogen causing human illnesses world-
wide. It cannot be debated that poultry meat and eggs 
are  major  vehicles  for  Salmonella  transmission  to 
human. As  such,  researchers,  veterinarians,  proces-
sors  and  the  government  are  working  in  tandem  to 
search for a new method of testing and characteriza-
tion for Salmonella. The present study was conducted 
to find out the prevalence of poultry  Salmonella in 
layer chicken and to find out the clonal relationship 
among them. The data in this study suggest the prev-
alence  of  Salmonella  Enterica,  which  is  multidrug 
resistant and highly clonal for commercial layers of 
Bangladesh.
Authors’ Contributions

MSP,  MJ  and  MFRK  have  participated  in  iso-
lation  of  samples  and  conventional  identification 
of  Salmonella  spp.,  and  drafting  the  manuscript. 
KHMNHN  and  MR  have  conducted  the  molecular 
identification  of  the  bacteria.  MBR  and  KHMNHN 
have critically checked the manuscript for finalization.

Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

68

Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.9/January-2016/12.pdf

Acknowledgements

The authors are gra teful to all researchers of the 
Department  of  Microbiology  and  Hygiene,  Bang- 
ladesh  Agricultural  University,  Mymensingh-2202, 
Bangladesh.  The  financial  support  from  the  Bang 
ladesh  Agricultural  Research  Council  (BARC)  is 
accordingly acknowledged.
Competing Interests

The authors declare that they have no competing 

interests.
References
1. 

Luna,  D.,  Cabrer,  B. 

(1990)  Foodborne  salmonellosis. 

Bennasar,  A.G., 
and 
Lalucat,  J.  (2000)  Rapid  identification  of  Salmonella 
Typhimurium,  S.  Enteritidis  and  S.  virchow  isolates  by 
polymerase  chain  reaction  based  fingerprinting  methods. 
Int. Microbiol., 3: 31-38.
Grimont, P.A., Grimont, F. and Bouvet, P. (2000) Taxonomy 
of the genus Salmonella. In: Wray, C. and Wray, A., edi-
tors. Salmonella in Domestic Animals. CAB International, 
New York, NY. p1-17.
Baird-Parker,  A.C. 
Lancet, 336: 1231-1235.
Jalil,  M.A.  and  Islam,  M.T.  (2011)  Serological  survey  of 
Salmonella  infection  in  non-vaccinated  commercial  layer 
birds in Khulna District of Bangladesh. Bangladesh J. Vet. 
Med., 9: 27-31.
Tassios, P.T. (1997) Molecular epidemiology of antibiotic 
resistance of Salmonella enteritidis during a 7-Year period 
in Greece. J. Clin. Microbiol., 35: 1316-1321.
DLS, (2009) Livestock Population. Directorate of Livestock 
Servieces, Khamarbari, Farmgate, Dhaka.
Kabir, S.S.K. (2005) Poultry in Bangladesh: Awaiting the 
awakening.  In:  Proceeding  of  4th  International  Poultry 
Show  and  Seminar,  from  February  28  to  March  2,  2003, 
Held in Bangladesh China Friendship Conference Centre, 
Agargaon, Dhaka. p8-15.
Haider,  M.G.,  Chowdhury,  E.H.,  Khan,  M.A.H.N., 
Hossain, M.T., Rahman, M.S., Song, H.J. and Hossain, M.M. 
(2008) Experimental pathogenesis of Pullorum disease with 
local isolate of Salmonella Enterica serovar. Enterica sub-
species Pullorum in pullets in Bangladesh. Korean J. Poult. 
Sci., 35: 341-350.
Jones,  F.T.,  Axtell,  R.C.,  Rives,  D.V.,  Scheideler,  S.E., 
Tarver, J., Walker, R.L. and Wineland, M.J. (1991) A survey 
of Salmonella contamination in modern broiler production. 
J. Food Prot., 54: 502-507.

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10.  Hoover, N.J., Kenney, P.B., Amick, J.D. and Hypes, W.A. 
(1997)  Preharvest  sources  of  Salmonella  colonization  in 
turkey production. Poult. Sci., 76: 1232-1238.

11.  Amick-Morris, J. (1998) Insect’s contribution to Salmonella 
transmission  in  turkey  flocks.  MS  Thesis,  West  Virginia 
University, Morgantown, WV, USA.

12.  Khan,  A.A.,  Melvin,  C.D.  and  Dagdag,  E.B.  (2007) 
Identification and molecular characterization of Salmonella 
spp. from unpasteurized orange juices and identification of 
new serotype Salmonella strain S. Enterica serovar.  Food 
Microbiol., 24: 39-43.

13.  White, D.G., Zhao, S., Sudler, R., Ayers, S., Friedman, S., 
Chen, S., McDermott, P.F., McDermott, S., Wagner, D.D. 
and  Meng,  J.  (2001)  The  isolation  of  antibiotic-resistant 
Salmonella  from  retail  ground  meats.  New  Eng.  J.  Med., 
345: 1147-1154.

14.  Padungtod, P. and Kaneene, J.B. (2006) Salmonella in food 
animals  and  humans  in  northern  Thailand.  Int.  J.  Food 
Microbiol., 108: 346-354.

15.  Waldroup, A.L. (1996) Contamination of raw poultry with 

pathogens. World Poult. Sci. J., 52: 7-25.

16.  Ahmed,  A.K.M., 

Islam,  M.T.,  Haider,  M.G.  and 
Hossain,  M.M.  (2008)  Seroprevalence  and  pathology  of 
naturally  infected  Salmonellosis  in  poultry  with  isolation 
and  identification  of  causal  agents.  J.  Bangladesh  Agric. 
Univ., 6: 327-334.

17.  Rahman,  M.R.,  Shahinuzzaman,  A.B.M.,  Saha,  A.K., 
Sufian,  M.A.,  Rahman,  M.H.  and  Hossain,  M.M.  (2011) 
Prevalence  of  Salmonella  infection  in  naturally  infected 
layer birds in Bangladesh. Bangladesh Vet., 28: 8-18.

18.  Saha, A.K., Sufian, M.A., Hossain, M.I. and Hossain, M.M. 
(2012)  Salmonellosis  in  layer  chickens:  Pathological  fea-
tures and isolation of bacteria from ovaries and inner con-
tent of laid eggs. J. Bangladesh Agric. Univ., 10: 61-67.

19.  Akond,  M.A.,  Shirin,  M.,  Alam,  S.,  Hassan,  S.M.R., 
Rahman,  M.M.  and  Hoq,  M.  (2012)  Frequency  of  drug 
resistant Salmonella spp. isolated from poultry samples in 
Bangladesh. Sci. J. Microbiol., 2: 15-19.

20.  Rybolt, M.L., Wills, R.W. and Bailey, R.H. (2005) Use of 
secondary enrichment for isolation of Salmonella from nat-
urally  contaminated  environmental  samples.  Poult.  Sci., 
84: 992-997.

21.  Husna, A.A., Islam, M.A., Rahman, M.T. and Khatun, M.M. 
(2015) Efficacy of vinegar, sorbitol and sodium benzoate in 
mitigation of Salmonella contamination in betel leaf. J. Adv. 
Vet. Anim. Res., 2: 190-194.

22.  Haider,  M.G.,  Chowdhury,  E.H.,  Ahmed,  A.K.M.  and 
Hossain,  M.M.  (2012)  Experimental  pathogenesis  of 
Pullorum disease in chicks by local isolate of  Salmonella 
Pullorum  in  Bangladesh.  J.  Bangladesh  Agric.  Univ., 
10: 87-94.

23.  Roy, S.R., Rahman, M.B., Hassan, J. and Nazir, K.H.M.N.H. 
(2012)  Isolation  and  identification  of  bacterial  flora  from 
internal  organs  of  broiler  and  their  antibiogram  studies. 
Microbes Health, 1: 72-75.

24.  Hasan, M.A., Mamun A.A., Uddin, A.S.M.A., Hassan, M.Z., 
Hasan,  H.  and  Rahman,  M.H.  (2015)  Investigation  into 
gyneco-pathological disorders and identification of associ-
ated bacteria from the genital organs of cows in Dinajpur, 
Bangladesh. J. Adv. Vet. Anim. Res., 2: 165-169.

25.  Ribot,  E.M.,  Fair,  M.A.  and  Gautom,  R. 

(2006) 
Standardization  of  pulsed-field  gel  electrophoresis  pro-
tocols  for  the  subtyping  of  Escherichia  coli  O157:H7, 
Salmonella, and Shigella for pulse net. Foodborne Pathog. 
Dis., 3: 59-67.

26.  Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI). (2007) 
Performance  Standards  for  Antimicrobial  Susceptibility 
Testing. Vol. 32. No. 3. CLSI, Wayne, PA. p32-35. 

27.  Shivaprasad, H.L. (2000) Fowl typhoid and Pullorum dis-

ease. Rev. Sci. Tech., 19: 405-424.

28.  Pomeroy,  B.S.  (1984)  Fowl  typhoid.  In:  Hofstad,  M.S., 
Barnes, H.J., Calnek, B.W., Reid, W.M., Yoder, H.W., edi-
tors. Diseases of Poultry. 8th ed. Iowa State University Press, 
Ames. p79-91.

29.  Al-Abadi,  I.K.M.  and AL-Mayah A.A.S.  (2011)  Isolation 
and  identification  of  Salmonella  spp.  from  chicken  and 
chicken environment in Basrah province. Afr. J. Biol. Sci., 
7: 33-43.

30.  Rahaman, M.T., Rahman, M., Rahman, M.B., Khan, M.F.R., 
Hossen, M.L., Parvej, M.S. and Ahmed, S. (2014) Poultry 
Salmonella specific bacteriophage isolation and characteri-
zation. Bangladesh J. Vet. Med., 12: 107-114.

31.  Paiva,  J.B.,  Cavallini,  J.S.,  Silva,  M.D.,  Almeida,  M.A., 
Angela,  H.L.  and  Berchieri  Junior,  A.  (2009)  Molecular 
differentiation  of  Salmonella  Gallinarum  and  Salmonella 
Pullorum  by  RFLP  of  flic  gene  from  Brazilian  isolates. 
Braz. J. Poultr. Sci., 11: 271-276.

32.  Aggarwal,  P.,  Sarkar,  R.,  Singh,  M.,  Grover,  B.D., 
Anand,  B.R.  and  Raichowdhuri, A.N.  (1983)  Salmonella 
bareilly  infection  in  a  paediatric  hospital  of  New  Delhi. 
Indian J. Med. Res., 78: 22-25.

Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

69

Available at www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.9/January-2016/12.pdf

33.  Ramya, P., Thirtham, M. and Eevuri, T.R. (2013) Antimicrobial 
sensitivity  and  resistance  of  Salmonella  enteritidis  isolated 
from natural samples. Vet. World, 6(4): 185-188.

34.  Hyeon,  J.Y.,  Chon,  J.W.,  Hwang,  I.G.,  Kwak,  H.S., 

Kim, M.S., Kim, S.K., Choi, I.S., Song, C.S., Park, C. and 
Seo,  K.H.  (2011)  Prevalence,  antibiotic  resistance,  and 
molecular characterization of Salmonella serovars in retail 
meat products. J. Food Prot., 74: 161-166.

********

Veterinary World, EISSN: 2231-0916 

70

