 Microbes and Health 

ISSN: 2226-0153 (Print) 

http://journal.bsvmph.org/ 

Microbes and Health, June 2012, 1(1): 6-8 

Isolation  and  Detection  of  Antibiotic  Sensitivity  Pattern  of  Escherichia  coli 
from Ducks in Bangladesh and Nepal 

Avishek Singh1,2, Md. Shahidur Rahman Khan1*, Sukumar Saha1, Jayedul Hassan1 and Urmi Roy3 

1Department  of  Microbiology  and  Hygiene,  Faculty  of  Veterinary  Science,  Bangladesh  Agricultural  University, 
Mymensingh-2202, Bangladesh. 
2Present  address:  Institute  for  Novel  and  Emerging  Infectious  Diseases,  Friedrich-Loeffler  Institute,  Federal  Research 
Institute for animal Health, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.  
3Department  of  Pathology,  Faculty  of  Veterinary  Science,  Bangladesh  Agricultural  University,  Mymensingh-2202, 
Bangladesh. 
 
*Corresponding author’s e-mail: msrkhan001@yahoo.com  

[Received: 08 April 2012, Revised: 05 May 2012, Accepted: 30 June 2012]  

A B S T R A C T 

A  total  of  120  rectal  swab  samples  from  ducks  (sixty  samples  from  Nepalgunj  area  of  Nepal  and  60  from  Boyera  area 
under Mymensingh district of Bangladesh) were collected for the isolation of Escherichia coli and their antibiogram study. 
After cultural and biochemical examination, a total of 40 samples from Nepalgunj and 45 samples from Boyera were found 
positive for E. coli.  Pathogenicity study of 10 positive isolates from Nepalgunj and 12 positive isolates from Boyera were 
done to detect the presence of enterotoxin. All inoculated mice died showing typical lesion of extensive hemorrhage and 
massive edema. The isolates from two different origins showed major difference in their antibiogram study. The isolates of 
Nepal  were  highly  sensitive  to  ciprofloxacin,  co-trimoxazole,  chloramphenicol  and  amoxicillin;  moderately  sensitive  to 
nalidixic  acid  and;  less  sensitive  to  kanamycin  and  resistant  to  cephalexin.  However,  the  isolates  of  Bangladesh  were 
highly sensitive to ciprofloxacin, chloramphenicol and amoxicillin; moderately sensitive to nalidixic acid, cephalexin, and 
co-trimoxazole;  less  sensitive  to  kanamycin.  This  variation  of antibiotic  sensitivity  and  resistance  patterns among  the  E. 
coli isolates of Nepal and Bangladesh might be due to strain variations and indiscriminate use of antibiotics in these two 
different countries. 

Keywords: Escherichia coli, Duck, Nepal, Bangladesh, Antibiogram 

Introduction 
 
Escherichia coli is a  Gram  negative, enteric bacillus, and 
best  known  as  a  noninvasive  commensal  that  grows  in 
mass  culture  in  human  and  in  animal  gut  lumen,  perhaps 
keeping  other    harmful  bacteria  away  from  proliferating 
(Buxton  and  Fraser,  1987).  E.  coli  is  found  habitually  in 
the  large  intestine  of  vertebrates  usually  as  a  part  of  the 
normal flora (Buxton and Fraser, 1987). E. coli remains as 
commensal and is mainly encountered in the lower portion 
of  the  intestine  and  acts  as  opportunistic  pathogens  of 
human and animal (Levine, 1884). It produces septicemia 
and diarrhea in ducks and other birds and animals, such as 
lamb,  goatlings,  foals  and  calves  (Hofstad  et  al.,  1984). 
Avian colibacillosis has been noticed to be a major infecti-
ous disease in birds of all ages. In Bangladesh, antibiotics 
are  randomly  used  for  the  treatment of  disease caused  by 
E. coli. Due to abuse of antibiotics in those country emer-
gences  of  multi-drug  resistant  E.  coli  are  continuously 
increasing (Hussain et al., 1982) and similar is the case in 

To cite this article: Singh A, S Saha, MSR Khan, J Hassan and U Roy, 2012. 
Isolation and detection of antibiotic sensitivity pattern of Escherichia coli from 
ducks in Bangladesh and Nepal. Microbes Health, 1(1): 6-8. 

© 2012 Microbes and Health. All rights reserved 

Nepal  (Baral  et  al.,  2012).  This  study  was  carried  out  to 
characterize  the  E.  coli  isolates  from  duck  of  Bangladesh 
and  Nepal  and  to  find  out  the  effective  antibiotic(s)  that 
could be applied to control avian colibacillosis in duck in 
these areas. 
 
Materials and Methods 
 
The  study  was  conducted  during  July  2010  to  Nov.  2010 
at  the  Department  of  Microbiology  and  Hygiene,  Bangla-
desh  Agricultural  University  (BAU),  Mymensingh-2202, 
Bangladesh.  A  total  of  60  field  samples  (rectal  swabs) 
were collected from 35 diarrheic and 25 apparently healthy 
ducks by sterile cotton bud and carried to the laboratory of 
Nepalgunj  Medical  College  and  Hospital,  Nepalgunj, 
Nepal.  All  these  60  samples  were  inoculated  on  Eosine 
Methylene  Blue  (EMB)  agar  plates, 
incubated  for 
overnight at 370C. The suspected colonies were brought to 
the  Laboratory  of  Bacteriology,  Department  of  Microbio-
logy and Hygiene, at BAU, Mymensingh maintaining cool 
chain.  Similarly,  60 field  samples comprising  rectal  swab 
were collected by sterile cotton bud from 35 diarrheic and 
25  apparently  healthy  ducks  of  Boyera  area,  located 
around  BAU,  Mymensingh,  Bangladesh  and  brought  to 
laboratory for isolation and characterization of E. coli. 

Singh et al. 

7 

Microbes and Health, June 2012, 1(1): 6-8 

Isolation and characterization of isolated E. coli  
Pure culture  was  obtained  from  the  primary  culture  using 
EMB  agar,  MacConkey  (MC)  agar,  Brilliant  Green  (BG) 
agar,  Salmonella-Shigella  (SS)  agar  and  Blood  agar.  The 
colony  characteristics  were  observed  and  Gram  staining 
was performed. Motility test and biochemical tests (Sugar 
Fermentation  test,  Indole  test,  Methyl-Red  (MR)  test, 
Voges-Proskauer (VP) test and Catalase test) were perfor-
med  for  further  characterization  of  the  isolates  of  both 
origins. 
 
Pathogenicity study of the isolates 
A  total  of  10  positive  isolates  from  Nepalgunj  and  12 
positive  isolates  from  Boyera  were  subjected  for  patho-
genicity study. A total of 30 new born Swiss Albino suck-
ling  mice  (2-4  days  old)  collected  from  the  Laboratory 
Animal  Center  of  the  Department  of  Microbiology  and 
Hygiene,  BAU  were  divided  into  two  groups  (n=15/ 
group): group A for isolates from Nepalgunj and group B 
for isolates from Boyera on random basis. Ten EMB colo-
nies of isolates from Nepalgunj and 12 colonies of isolates 
from  Boyra  were  inoculated  into  nutrient  broth  and  incu-
bated  overnight  at  370C.  The  cells  were  then  removed 
from the broth culture by centrifugation at 25,000 rpm for 
20 min. The supernatants were filtered and collected. Each 
of the 12 mice in group A received 0.1 ml of supernatant 
by oral route   and remaining 3 mice were kept as control. 
Similarly, 10 mice from group B were administered 0.1 ml 
of  supernatant  and  5  mice  from  this  group  were  kept  as 
control  without  enterotoxin  treatment.  Both  groups  were 
kept at room temperature for 14 hours. After 14 hours all 
mice (live and dead) including the control mice, were nec-
ropsied.  The ratio of gut weight and the remaining carcass 
weight  was  calculated  for  each  mouse  and  the  average 
ratio was calculated (Gyles, 1979). 
 
Antibiogram of isolates 
Eight  different  antibacterial  discs  (HiMedia,  Mumbai, 
India)  were  selected  randomly  for  antibiotic  sensitivity 
study against isolated E. coli from Bangladesh and Nepal 
(Table 1). Six isolates from each of the country were sub-
jected for antibiogram study.  A disk diffusion test of the 
Kirby-Bauer  (Bauer  et  al.,  1966)  method  was  used  to 
determine the susceptibility of E. coli isolates to different 
antibiotic  agents.  The  procedure  involved  measuring  the 
diameter  of  the  zone  of  inhibition that results  from diffu-
sion  of  the  agent  into  the  medium  surrounding  the  disc. 
Tentative  inhibition  zone  diameter  interpretive  criteria 
were  developed  using  the  error-rate-bounded  methods  re-
commended  by 
the  CLSI  (Clinical  and  Laboratory 
Standards Institute, 2011). 

Results 
 
Isolation and identification of E. coli isolates 
All  the  positive  E.  coli  isolates  from  both  Nepal  and 
Bangladesh  showed  characteristics  colony  morphology  in 
EMB  agar,  MC  agar,  Blood  agar,  SS  agar  and  BG  agar 
media.  Characteristic  pink,  rod,  short,  Gram  negative 
bacilli  were  found  with  Gram  staining.  All  the  isolates 
were found to be motile with hanging drop slide. The five 
basic sugars (dextrose, sucrose, lactose, maltose and man-
nitol)  were  fermented  by  all  the  isolates  producing  acid 
and  gas.  In  addition,  all  the  isolates  were  found  positive 
for MR test, negative for VP test and positive for indole. 

Table 1. Antimicrobial discs and their concentrations 

Antimicrobial agents 
Chloramphenicol (CL) 

Cephalexin  (CK) 
Amoxycillin  (AX) 
Erythromycin  (ER) 
Cotrimoxazole (CT) 
Ciprofloxacin  (CP) 
Nalidixic  acid (NA) 
Kanamycin  (KA) 

µg = Microgram 

Disc concentration (µg/disk) 

30 

30 
30 
15 
25 
5 
30 
30 

Table  2.  Rectal  swab  samples  collected  from  duck 
found positive for E. coli 

Origin of 
samples (n) 
Bangladesh 
(60) 
Nepal (60) 

Conditions of 
birds (n) 
Healthy (25) 
Diarrheic (35) 
Healthy (25) 
Diarrheic (35) 

Positive samples 
for E. coli  
10 
35 
5 
35 

Prevalence 
in % 
40 
100 
20 
100 

Fig. 1: Antibiogram of E. coli isolates of duck collected 
from  Bangladesh  and  Nepal.  Considerable differences in sensiti-
vity shown by E. coli against three antibiotics (Cotrimoxazole, Ciprofloxacin 
and  Erythromycin)  was  revealed  in  between  the  isolates  of  Bangladesh  and 
Nepal.  

Pathogenicity test of isolated duck E. coli 
After  14  hours,  all  inoculated  mice  died  showing  typical 
lesion of extensive hemorrhage and massive edema of the 
gut.  The  ratio  of  gut  weight  and  the  remaining  carcass 
weight  was  measured  and  the  average  ratio  of  less  than 
0.070  was  considered  negative  while  0.070-0.085  was 
considered  positive  for  enterotoxin  (Gyles,  1979).  Eight 
isolates  from  Nepal  and  ten  isolates  from  Bangladesh 
were found positive for enterotoxin.  
 
Antibiogram 
Antibiogram  study  of  the  isolated  E.  coli  against  8  com-
monly  used  antibacterial  agents  of  different  groups  reve-
aled  that  E.  coli  isolated  from  Bangladesh  were  highly 
sensitive  to  ciprofloxacin,  chloramphenicol  and  amoxi-
cillin and  moderately  sensitive  to  nalidixic acid, cephale-
xin  and  co-trimoxazole  and  less  sensitive  to  kanamycin. 
On  the  other  hand,  E.  coli  isolated  from  Nepal  were 
highly  sensitive  to  ciprofloxacin,  co-trimoxazole,  chlora-
mphenicol  and  amoxicillin,  and  moderately  sensitive  to 
nalidixic  acid  and  less  sensitive  to  kanamycin  and  resis-
tant to cephalexin. 

Singh et al. 

8 

Microbes and Health, June 2012, 1(1): 6-8 

 Discussion 
 
The  isolated  E. coli  on  BA  and  BG  agar produces  round, 
colorless  colony  with  hemolysis  and  green  color  colonies 
respectively. Similar types of cultural characteristics were 
earlier  reported  by  Buxton  and  Fraser  (1977)  and  Hasina 
(2006).  In  Gram  staining,  the  morphology  of  the  isolated 
bacteria  exhibited  Gram  negative  short  rod  arranged  in 
single  or  paired  which  was  supported  by  several  authors 
(Buxton  and  Fraser,  1987;  Jones,  1987).  All  the  isolated 
revealed  a  complete  fermentation  of  five  basic  sugars  as 
stated by Beutin et al. (1997) and Mckee et al. (1995). 
 
Antibiogram results showed that this isolated E. coli from 
both  Bangladesh  and  Nepal  were  highly  sensitive  against 
ciprofloxacin,  chloramphenicol  and  amoxicillin.    Similar 
results  were  obtained  in  the  E.  coli  isolates  of  duck  in 
South  Korea  (Unno et al.,  2010).  In  addition,  the  isolates 
from  Nepal  showed  high  sensitivity  against  co-trimoxa-
zole  (Fig).  Recently,  some  E.  coli  isolates  of  duck  in 
China  showed  high  resistance  against  ciprofloxacin  and 
chloramphenicol (Ma et al., 2012). Again, E. coli isolated 
from Bangladesh showed moderate sensitivity to nalidixic 
acid,  kanamycin  and  co-trimoxazole;  less  sensitivity  to 
cephalexin and resistance to erythromycin (Fig. 1). On the 
other  hand,  E.  coli  isolates  from  Nepal  showed  moderate 
sensitivity  against  nalidixic  acid  and  kanamycin;  less 
sensitivity  against  erythromycin  and  resistance  against 
cephalexin (Fig. 1). 
 
Conclusion 
 
Based on this study, it may be concluded that chloramphe-
nicol,  ciprofloxacin  and  amoxicillin  should  be  the  first 
choice of treatment against avian colibacillosis in duck in 
Bangladesh.  On  the  other  hand  amoxicillin,  co-trimoxa-
zole, ciprofloxacin and chloramphenicol should be the first 
choice  of  drug  for  the  treatment  of  avian colibacillosis  in 
duck in Nepal. The resistance pattern observed among the 
isolated E. coli in Bangladesh and Nepal might be related 
to  the  extensive  and  indiscriminate  use  of  antibiotic  in 
duck in these areas. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We thank Dr. Md. Tanvir Rahman, Assoc. Prof., Dept. of 
Microbiology and Hygiene, Bangladesh Agricultural Uni-
versity,  Mymensingh-2202,  Bangladesh  for  his  critical 
corrections and suggestions on the manuscript. 
 
References  
 
Baral P, S Neupane, BP Marasini, KR Ghimire, B Lekhak 
and B Shrestha, 2012. High prevalence of multidrug 

 

resistance  in  bacterial  uropathogens  from  Kathmandu, 
Nepal. BMC Res Notes, 5: 38. 

Bauer  AW,  WMM  Kirdy,  JC  Sheris  and  M  Truck,  1966. 
Antibiotic  susceptibility  testing  by  a standardized    sin- 
gle disk method. Am J Clin Path, 145: 225-230. 

Beutin L, D Geier, S Zimmeronann, S Aleksic, HA Gille-
spie  and  TS  Whittam,  1997.  Epidemiological  related-
ness  and  clonal  types  of  natural  populations  of  E.  coli 
strains  producing  shiga  toxin  in  separate  population  of 
cattle  and  sheep.    Appl  Environ  Microbiol,  63:  2175-
2180. 

Buxton  A  and  G  Fraser,  1987.  Animal  Microbiology. 
Blackwell  Scientific  Publications,  Oxford,  London. 
Edinburg., Melbourne, pp: 85-86, 99. 

Clinical and  Laboratory  Standards  Institute,  2011.  Perfor-
mance standards for antimicrobial susceptibility testing; 
21st informational supplement. CLSI document M100-
S21.  Clinical  and  Laboratory  Standards  Institute, 
Wayne, Pa. 

Gyles  CL,  1979.  Limitations  of  the  infant  mouse  test  for 
Escherichia  coli  heat  stable  enterotoxin.  Can  J  Comp 
Med, 43: 371-379. 

Hasina  B,  2006.  Enteropathotypic  characterization  of 
Escherichia coli isolated from diarrheic calves and their 
antibiogram  study.  M.S.  Thesis,  Department  of  Micro-
biology and Hygiene, BAU, Mymensingh. 

Hofstad  MS,  BH  John,  BW  Calnek,  WN  Reid  and  JHW 
Yoder, 1984. Diseases of poultry. 8th edn., Panima Edu-
cation Book Agreny, New Delhi, India, pp: 65-123.  

Hussain  MM,  RJ  Glass  and  MR  Khan,  1982.  Antibiotic 
used  in  a  rural  community  in  Bangladesh.  Int  J  Epid-
emiol, 11: 402-405.  

Jones  TO,  1987.  Intramammary    antibiotic  preparations 
and  cephalosporin  resistance  in  Salmonella  typhimu-
rium 204c . Vet Rec, 120: 399-400.  

Levine MM, 1984. Escherichia coli infections. Germander 
(ed.),  Bacterial  vaccines,  Academic  Press,  Inc,  New 
York, pp: 187-235. 

Ma J, J Liu, L Lv, Z Zong, Y Sun, H Zheng, ZL Chen and 
Z  Zeng,  2012.  Characterization  of  extended-spectrum 
β-lactamase genes found among Escherichia coli isola-
tes  from  duck  and  environment  samples  obtained  on  a 
duck farm. Appl Environ Microbiol, 78: 3668-3673. 

McKee  ML,  AR  Melton-Celsa,  RA  Moxley,  DH  Fancis 
and  AD  O‘Brien,  1995.  Enterohaemorrhagic  E.  coli 
0157:H7  requires  intimin  to  colonize  the  gnotobiotic 
pig  intestine  and  to  adhere  to  Hep-2  cells.  Infect 
Immun, 63: 3739-3744. 

 Unno T, D Han, J Jang, S Lee, JH Kim, GP Ko, BG Kim, 
J  Ahn,  RA  Kanaly,  MJ  Sadowsky  and  H  Hur,  2010. 
High  diversity  and  abundance  of  antibiotic-resistant 
Escherichia coli isolated from humans and farm animal 
hosts  in  Jeonnam  Province,  South  Korea.  Sci  Total 
Environ, 408: 3499-3506. 

