©2008 Poultry Science Association, Inc.

Antimicrobial Susceptibility of Escherichia coli

Isolated from Iranian Broiler
Chicken Flocks, 2005–2006

E. Saberfar,* B. Pourakbari,†1 K. Chabokdavan,‡ and F. Taj Dolatshahi‡

*Bagiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Medical School, Department of

Microbiology, Tehran, Iran, 19945; †Infectious Disease Research Center, University of

Tehran/Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 14176; and ‡ViroMed Laboratory,

Department of Microbiology, Tehran, Iran, 14199

Primary Audience: Researchers, Veterinarian Practitioners, Flock Supervisors,

Microbiologists

SUMMARY

Escherichia coli is a major pathogen of worldwide importance in commercially produced
poultry, contributing signiﬁcantly to economic losses in chickens and turkeys. One hundred
thirty-ﬁve cases in broilers were examined and cultured for isolation and antimicrobial
sensitivity evaluation of E. coli between January 2005 and December 2006. In 103 cases
(76.3%) E. coli were isolated and in 32 cases (23.7%) no E. coli growth was observed. Multiple
resistances were seen in all isolates. All isolates were uniformly resistant to Tiamuline, Tylosin,
and Bacitracin. We observed low levels of resistance to Gentamicin (12%), Kanamycin (0%),
and Florfenicol (39%). Percentages of resistance to Tiamuline, Bacitracin, Tylosin, Colistin,
and Erythromycin (≥99%); Tetracycline (96%); Oxytetracycline (93%); Flomequine (87%);
Neomycine (87%); Lincospectin (79%); Diﬂoxacin (78%); Enroﬂoxacin (76%); Cotrimoxazole
(72%); Chloramphenicol (52%); and Ampicillin (49%) were determined. Our data show high
levels of multiresistance among Iranian E. coli isolates. It seems that the pattern of antibiotic
resistance of bacteria that are clinically important for the poultry industry should be monitored.

2008 J. Appl. Poult. Res. 17:302–304
doi:10.3382/japr.2007-00102

DESCRIPTION OF PROBLEM

Escherichia coli

is a major pathogen of
worldwide importance in commercially pro-
duced poultry, contributing signiﬁcantly to eco-
nomic losses in chickens and turkeys. Colibac-
illosis begins, in general, with an infection of the
upper respiratory tract, followed by septicemia.
Escherichia coli is commonly found in the intes-
tinal tracts of animals, but usually only certain

pathogenic serotypes that show virulence factors
(adhesive ability, aerobactin production, serum
resistance, and presence of the ColV plasmid)
cause disease conditions [1].

Antimicrobial therapy is an important tool in
reducing the incidence and mortality associated
with avian colibacillosis. However, resistance
to existing antimicrobials is widespread and of
concern to poultry veterinarians [1]. The ﬂuoro-
quinolones are a new class of antimicrobials that

1Corresponding author: pourakbari@razi.tums.ac.ir

SABERFAR ET AL.: ANTIMICROBIAL SUSCEPTIBILITY OF ESCHERICHIA COLI

303

exhibit excellent activity against gram-negative
bacilli, but using these antimicrobials in poultry
may cause cross-resistance with ﬂuoroquino-
lones used for treatment of important human
enteric infections [2]. The present study deter-
mines antimicrobial susceptibility among a col-
lection of avian pathogenic E. coli recovered
from diseased birds diagnosed with colibac-
illosis in Iran from January 2005 to December
2006.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

A total of 135 broiler chickens grown on
different commercial farms from almost all parts
of Iran, which were suspect colibacillosis cases,
had been referred to the microbiology depart-
ment of ViroMed Laboratory between January
2005 and December 2006. Bacteria were origi-
nally recovered from a variety of tissues includ-
ing the air sacs, pericardial sac, heart, liver, tra-
chea, joint cavity, bone marrow, blood, and
spleen and plated on blood agar and MacConkey
agar plates. All bacterial isolates were microbio-
logically identiﬁed by standard biochemical
identiﬁcation methods [3, 4]. Antimicrobial sus-
ceptibility testing was performed by the Kirby-
Bauer disk diffusion method, which has been the
predominant method used in Iran, in accordance
with National Committee for Clinical Labora-
tory Standards guidelines at the time of the study
[5, 6]. Quality control organisms were utilized
routinely in the laboratory to ensure accurate
performance of the susceptibility tests. For data
analysis and presentation, bacterial isolates that
showed intermediate susceptibility to an antimi-
crobial agent were categorized as resistant iso-
lates. The antimicrobial agents selected for our
analysis were antibiotics that were commonly
included in the treatment of colibacillosis in
Iran. Antimicrobial susceptibility results were
rounded down if <0.5 and were presented as
whole numbers if ≥0.5.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Antibiotic usage is possibly the most im-
portant factor that promotes the emergence, se-
lection, and dissemination of antibiotic-resistant
microorganisms in veterinary medicine. In poul-
try ﬂocks, inappropriate antibiotic therapy and
using antibiotics as growth promoters may result
in high antibiotic selection pressure. Therefore,

Table 1. Antimicrobial sensitivity of Escherichia coli
isolates from Iranian broiler ﬂocks

Antibiotics

Gentamicin
Florfenicol
Tiamuline
Cotrimoxazole
Neomycine
Erythromycin
Flomequine
Lincospectin
Chloramphenicol
Tetracycline
Tylosin
Diﬂoxacin
Ampicillin
Oxytetracycline
Colistin
Enroﬂoxacin
Bacitracin
Kanamycin

Number
of isolates

Percent

of sensitivity

99
77
98
100
95
97
99
96
69
92
98
85
99
15
5
100
8
9

88
61
0
28
13
1
13
21
48
4
0
22
51
7
0
24
0
100

poultry pathogenic bacteria contain a relatively
high proportion of resistant isolates. These resis-
tant bacteria cause problems in rearing poultry
ﬂocks and in human health. Hence, the Food
and Drug Administration has emphasized that
antibiotic-fed animals can produce and increase
the spread of drug-resistant organisms
to
humans.

In this study from 135 colibacillosis cases
in broiler chickens, E. coli were isolated from
103 cases (76.3%), and in 32 cases (23.7%) no
E. coli were isolated. The negative cultures may
result from drug intervention before referring
the cases to the laboratory. The susceptibility
pattern of each antimicrobial agent tested is
shown in Table 1. The ﬁrst group includes the
antibiotics to which there were very high levels
of resistance (70 to 100%). These are Tiamuline,
Bacitracin, Tylosin, and Colistin (100%); Eryth-
romycin (99%); Tetracycline (96%); Oxytetra-
cycline (93%); Flomequine and Neomycine
(87%); Lincospectin (79%); Diﬂoxacin (78%);
Enroﬂoxacin (76%); and Cotrimoxazole (72%).
The second group includes the antibiotics to
which there were moderate levels of resistance
(30 to 70%). These are Chloramphenicol (52%),
Ampicillin (49%), and Florfenicol (39%). The
third group includes the antibiotics to which
there were low levels of resistance (0 to 30%).
These are Gentamicin (12%) and Kanamycin

304

JAPR: Field Report

(0%). All isolated E. coli showed resistance to
4 or more antibiotics, so multiple resistances
was observed in all of our isolates. They are
uniformly resistant to Tiamuline, Tylosin, Baci-
tracin, Colistin, and Erythromycin (≥99%).

As shown in Table 1, our isolates have good
sensitivity to the Aminoglycosides, Kanamycin
(100%), and Gentamicin (88%). Kanamycin and
Florfenicol are relatively new antimicrobials in
the Iranian poultry industry. Hence, it may take
time to effectively select resistant bacteria. Be-
cause of some difﬁculties in using Gentamicin
in poultry ﬂocks, farmers are not interested to
use it. Gentamicin is available in Iran for poultry
ﬂocks just for injection. Because injection of
poultry ﬂocks requires a specialized team, it
would be expensive. Due to impaired quarantine
in most Iranian poultry farms, these teams may
introduce other diseases to the farm. Handling
poultry ﬂocks for injection may cause stress and
consequently make the situation critical. There-
fore, injection for broilers is not acceptable, es-
pecially in the time of colibacillosis, which is
common in the late stage of rearing. So there is
not any antibiotic selection pressure for Genta-
micin. This may explains the high percentage
of sensitivity against this antimicrobial agent.

In comparison with another study performed
in northwest Iran in 2005, our data are almost
the same [7]. Tabatabaei and Nasirian [8] re-
ported 48, 56, and 44% resistance to Neomycine,
Flomequine, and Enroﬂoxacin, respectively, in
Iran in 2002. In comparison with our study, resis-
tance to these antibiotics has increased more
than 32%, but the rate of resistance to Chloram-
phenicol and tetracycline has not changed.

Comparing our data with studies performed
in Europe and the United States show that Ira-
nian isolates are relatively more resistant than
European and US isolates [2, 9]. This can result
from different reasons, including blind antimi-
crobial therapy, excessive usage of antimicrobi-
als for prophylaxis, inappropriate treatment, and
impaired quarantine systems in the Iranian poul-
try industry.

CONCLUSIONS

AND APPLICATIONS

1. Our data indicate that antimicrobial resis-
tance is an important factor challenging the
poultry industry in our country. Unfortu-
nately, there are no E. coli monitoring pro-
grams that control the trend of antibiotic
resistance in Iran.

2. It seems necessary that an organization
monitor the pattern of antibiotic resistance
for any bacteria that is clinically important
for poultry industry. Results of such moni-
toring can help us to choose an appropriate
antimicrobial agent for therapeutic inter-
vention.

REFERENCES AND NOTES

1. Barnes, J. H., J. P. Vaillancourt, and W. B. Gross.
2003. Disease of Poultry. 11th ed. Iowa State Press, Black-
well Publ. Co., Iowa City, IA..

2. Blanco, J. E., M. Blanco, A. Mora, and J. Blanco.
1997. Prevalence of bacterial resistance to Quinolones and
other antimicrobials among avian Escherichia coli strains
isolated from septicemic and healthy chickens in Spain. J.
Clin. Microbiol. 35:2184–2185.

3. Pezzlo, M. 1992. Aerobic bacteriology. Pages 1.19.1–
1.20.47 in Clinical Microbiology Procedures Handbook. H.
D. Isenberg, ed. Am. Soc. Microbiol., Washington, DC.

4. Reisner, S. B., G. L. Woods, R. P. Thomson, D. H.
Larone, L. S. Garcia, and R. Y. Shimuzu. 1999. Specimen
collection. Pages 64–76 in Manual of Clinical Microbiology,
7th ed. P. R. Murray, E. J. Baron, M. A. Pfaller, F. C.
Tenover, and R. H. Yolken, ed. Am. Soc. Microbiol., Wash-
ington, DC.

5. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Stan-
dards. 1997. Methods for Dilution Antimicrobial Suscepti-
bility Tests for Bacteria that Grow Aerobically. Approved
Standard M7-A4. NCCLS, Wayne, PA.

6. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Stan-
dards. 1997. Performance Standards for Antimicrobial Disk
Susceptibility Tests: Approved Standard M2-A6.

7. Salehi, Z. T., and F. S. Bonab. 2006. Antibiotics sus-
ceptibility pattern of Escherichia coli strains isolated from
chickens with colisepticemia in Tabriz Province, Iran. Int.
J. Poult. Sci. 5:677–684.

8. Tabatabaei, R. R., and A. Nasirian. 2003. Isolation,
Identiﬁcation and antimicrobial resistance patterns of E. coli
isolated from chicken ﬂocks. Iran. J. Pharmacol. Ther.
2:39–42.

9. David, G., and S. Burch. 2000. Antimicrobial sensitiv-
ity patterns of UK chicken E. coli isolates. Page 73c in
paper presented at the European Association of Veterinary
Pharmacology and Toxicology Congress, Jerusalem, Israel.
Octagon Services Ltd., Old Windsor, Berks, UK.

