Short Communication

Turk. J. Vet. Anim. Sci.
2010; 34(5): 455-460  
© TÜBİTAK
doi:10.3906/vet-0908-57

Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella serovars

isolated from poultry meat in Hyderabad, Pakistan

Aijaz Hussain SOOMRO1,*, Muhammad KHASKHELI1, Muhammad Bachal BHUTTO2,

Ghiasuddin SHAH3, Azizullah MEMON4, Parkash DEWANI5

1Department of Animal Products Technology, Faculty of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Sciences,

Sindh Agriculture University, Tandojam, PAKISTAN

2Department of Veterinary Parasitology, Faculty of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Sciences,

Sindh Agriculture University, Tandojam, PAKISTAN

3Department of Anatomy and Histology, Faculty of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Sciences,

Sindh Agriculture University, Tandojam, PAKISTAN

4Department of Poultry Husbandry, Faculty of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Sciences,

Sindh Agriculture University, Tandojam, PAKISTAN

5Central Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, Sindh, Tandojam, PAKISTAN

Received: 27.08.2009

Abstract: This study was conducted to investigate the prevalence of Salmonella in broiler chicken meat sold in Hyderabad,
Pakistan. A total of 100 samples were randomly collected from poultry meat retail markets and examined for the presence
of Salmonella. The prevalence rate recorded was 38%. The most prevalent serogroups were S. enteritidis, S. typhi, S.
pullorum, and S. typhimurium. All the Salmonella isolates showed resistance to ampicillin, and sensitivity to tetracycline,
streptomycin, cefotaxime, ceftazidime, gentamicin, tobramycin, ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, and chloramphenicol. The
findings highlighted the magnitude of Salmonella contamination in chicken meat sold in the city, and the antibiotic
resistance of Salmonella isolates is an indication of indiscriminate and continuous use of antibiotics in poultry feed as well
as in the broiler flocks. The results showed the possible significance of chicken meat as a source of antimicrobial-resistant
Salmonella for human infections and suggested the need for further detailed epidemiological studies.

The poultry industry has made great strides in the
last few decades in Pakistan and has increased at the
rate  of  20%  to  25%  per  annum  producing  0.652
million tons of meat, which is 23% of the total meat
production in the country (1). The broiler meat is
largely consumed throughout the country in order to

meet  the  nutritional  requirements  in  the  form  of
animal protein. However, the industry is facing major
problems such as lack of disease control programs
mainly associated with poor handling of raw material
from production to marketing facilities. Increase in
demand  for  meat  without  the  infrastructure  for

* E-mail: aijaz68@hotmail.com 

455

Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella serovars isolated from poultry meat in Hyderabad, Pakistan

proper  sanitary  handling  may  lead  to  transfer  of
pathogenic  microorganisms  from  animals  to  the
consumer.  These  bacterial  hazards  are  of  major
concern in the hygienic production of food of animal
origin.

Among  the  food-borne  pathogens  the  genus
Salmonella is one of the most common causes of food-
borne  infections  worldwide  (2).  A  characteristic
feature of this organism is its wide host range, which
comprises most animal species including mammals,
birds  and  cold-blooded  animals  in  addition  to
humans.  It has been reported that Salmonella is one
of  the  most  important  pathogens  responsible  for
human food poisoning in the developed world, and
chicken products are widely acknowledged to be a
significant reservoir for Salmonella. Therefore, this
organism has been isolated from a range of foods in
almost every country in which it has been investigated
(3). During transportation broiler flocks are thought
to be in stress and that leads to shedding of Salmonella
from Salmonella carriers, hence contaminating other
birds.  The  level  of  contamination  dramatically
increases during the containment in holding cages
before slaughter. Besides this the increasing incidence
of  salmonellosis  is  due  to  a  number  of  technical
practices, including traditional slaughtering, handling
with different levels of hygiene, and transportation
distances. After slaughter, the subsequent dressing of
meats increases the spread of Salmonellae on meat
surfaces and, by the time the meat is in retail outlets,
contamination levels may have increased by up to 20%
(4). Such practices have made salmonellosis a major
economic problem in the food industry and a public
health hazard for many countries. In addition to its
pathogenicity, 
there  has  been  concern  about
antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella, which has lead
to  failure  of  treatment  for  Salmonella and  other
bacterial pathogens (5). Since foods of animal origin
are a major source of Salmonella spp., it has been
suggested  that  antimicrobial  use  in  food  animal
production  may  contribute  to  the  presence  of
antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella spp. that infects
humans.  The  purpose  of  the  present  study  was  to
evaluate the prevalence of Salmonella isolated from
poultry meat and to estimate the resistance profile of
the isolates against commonly used antibiotics.

456

Sample collection: A total of 100 broiler carcasses
were randomly collected from sale points located at
different fresh poultry meat retailers of Hyderabad
market.  The  samples  were  then  brought  to  the
Microbiology Section, Central Veterinary Diagnostic
Laboratory, Tandojam, in sterile wide-mouth screw-
capped bottles under refrigeration and then analysed
for the presence of Salmonella.

and 

agar 

collected 

Isolation  and 

Salmonella-Shigella

identification  of  Salmonella:
Approximately 25 g of meat was excised from each
collected sample, minced and placed in 225 mL of
buffered peptone water (Oxoid, Basingstoke, UK) as
pre-enrichment media, and incubated at 37 °C for 18
h. Aliquots from pre-enrichment were inoculated into
selective enrichment liquid media at a ratio of 1:10 in
Selenite-Cysteine  broth.  A  loopful  of  broth  was
streaked on plates of Brilliant Green agar, MacConkey
agar, 
(Oxoid,
Basingstoke, UK). The temperature and the period of
incubation  were  standardised  at  37  °C  for  24  h,
respectively. Suspected colonies of Salmonella from
each  plate  were 
for  presumptive
identification by their morphological characteristics
and biochemical tests. The primary tests included
Gram’s stain, catalase, oxidase, motility, Triple Sugar
Iron agar (TSI), indol, methyl red, Voges-Proskauer,
and citrate utilisation test. Colonies with biochemistry
profile of Salmonella were submitted to serological
tests  by  using  polyvalent  serum  against  O  and  H
Salmonella antigens (Difco, Detroit, MI, USA). The
colonies that agglutinated during the period of 1 to 2
min were considered as positive for Salmonella, and
were preserved in nutrient agar at 4 °C. Suspected
colonies (maximum 5) were randomly selected from
each  plate  and  confirmed  by  biochemical  tests
including  fermentation  of  glucose,  lactose  and
sucrose,  hydrogen  sulphide  production,  urease
activity, 
lysine
decarboxylation, citrate, methyl red, and indole tests.
Antimicrobial sensitivity test: The behaviour of all
Salmonella isolates was checked for their sensitivity
against the antimicrobial agents. The isolates were
submitted to sensitivity tests according to the Bauer-
Kirby method (6). Each isolate was inoculated in BHI
(brain  heart  infusion)  broth  (Oxoid,  Basingstoke,
UK), following the 24 h of incubation at 37 °C, the
broth was streaked by using sterile swabs on Mueller-

phenylalanine 

deamination, 

A. Hussain SOOMRO, M. KHASKHELI, M. B. BHUTTO, G. SHAH, A. MEMON, P. DEWANI

Hinton agar (Oxoid, Basingstoke, UK) plates. Plates
were kept at room temperature for 5 min, and then
diffusion disks with antimicrobial drugs were placed
on the plates and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C. The
antibiotics  (Oxoid,  Basingstoke,  UK)  used  were:
ampicillin (10 μg), cefotaxime (30 μg), ceftazidime (30
μg),  streptomycin  (10  μg),  gentamicin  (10  μg),
kanamycin (30 μg), tobramycin (10 μg), neomycin (30
μg),  nalidixic  acid  (30  μg),  ciprofloxacin  (5  μg),
(30  μg),
ofloxacin 
tetracycline 
trimethoprim–
sulfamethoxazole (25 μg). Results were interpreted by
measuring inhibition zones with a millimetre scale.
Out of 100 samples tested 38 (38%) were found
positive for various species of Salmonella. S. enteritidis
was  found  in  16  (42.10%)  samples,  S.  typhi  in  11
(28.94%),  S.  pullorum in  7  (18.4%), and  S.
typhimurium in 4 (10.52%) (Table 1). 

(5  μg),  chloramphenicol 

and 

(30 

μg),

The different Salmonella serotypes and their rates
of isolation from poultry meat are shown in Table 1.
The most common serogroups found in poultry meat
samples were from groups B and D. The majority of
the Salmonella serotypes isolated from all the sources
are known to be pathogenic to humans. 

As seen from Table 2, all isolates showed sensitivity
to cefotaxime, ceftazidime, gentamicin, tobramycin,
ciprofloxacin,  ofloxacin,
and  chloramphenicol,
whereas resistance to streptomycin, tetracycline, and
ampicillin was also detected. A lower proportion of
isolates  were 
and
trimethoprim–sulphametoxazole.

to  kanamycin 

resistant 

Poultry are the most important animal reservoir
for Salmonella; the incidence in chicken carcasses in
most  countries  ranged  from  20%  to  70%  (7).  The
incidence of Salmonella in chicken meat may be a
result of cross-contamination from intestines during
processing  and  cutting  or  from  cages,  floor, and
workers  during  retailing  or  marketing.  The
contamination rates observed in our results are in
agreement with those observed in other countries:
23%-34% in Belgium (8), 25% in the United Kingdom
(9), and 36% in Malaysia (10). 

The  high  prevalence  (42.10%)  of  S.  enteritidis
observed in the present study is comparable to the
situation described in most countries in recent years
(11). It reflects the presence of this serovar in the
intestinal  tract  of 
live  broilers,  contaminating
carcasses  during  slaughter  and  processing.  The

Table 1. Species-wise prevalence of Salmonella serovars isolated from broiler meat.

Sampling
group

Samples collected

(no.)

No. of samples

positive

Percentage 

Serovar isolated  

(no.)

A 

B

C

D

25

25

25

25

Total

100

12 

10 

9

7

38

S. pullorum
S. typhi
S. enteritidis

S. pullorum
S. typhimurium
S. typhi
S. enteritidis

S. pullorum
S. typhi
S. enteritidis

S. typhi
S. enteritidis
S. typhimurium

(3)
(3)
(6)

(2)
(2)
(3)
(3)

(2)
(3)
(4)

(2)
(3)
(2)

48

40

36

28

38

457

Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella serovars isolated from poultry meat in Hyderabad, Pakistan

Table 2. Antibiotic resistance profile of Salmonella serovars isolated from broiler meat.

Antibiotics (µg/ disc)

S. enteritidis

(n = 16)

S. typhi
(n = 11)

S. pullorum

S. typhimurium

(n = 7)

(n = 4)

Ampicillin (10)
Cefotaxime (30)
Ceftazidime (30)
Streptomycin (10)
Gentamicin (10)
Kanamycin (30)
Tobramycin (10)
Neomycin (30)
Nalidixic acid (30)
Ciprofloxacin (5)
Ofloxacin (5)
Chloramphenicol (30)
Tetracycline (30) 
Trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole (25)

16
-
-
15
-
-
-
4
10
-
-
-
15
1

11
-
-
10
-
-
-
2
6
-
-
-
10
2

7
-
-
6
-
-
-
4
5
-
-
-
7
2

4
-
-
4
-
1
-
2
2
-
-
-
4
1

presence of S. typhi and S. typhimurium in poultry is
of considerable importance from the standpoint of
public  health,whereas  S.  pullorum isolated  in  the
present study indicates the faecal contamination of
carcass as reported earlier (12).

Broiler meat is an important source of protein and
a valuable commodity for the local consumers in the
city of Hyderabad, Pakistan. This study on poultry
meat sale points revealed that most of the shops do
not  operate  in  a  safe  and  clean  environment,  and
rarely practice the appropriate covering for displayed
carcass.  Moreover,  the  practice  of  using  the  same
cutting knives for the uninfected and infected carcass,
results in a further chance of cross-contamination.
The processing of carcasses as per consumer demand
further spreads contamination by exposing carcass
surface  and  susceptible 
the
contaminants by using the same cutting tables. In
addition, the water used for washing of carcasses is
from the same container and it could be contaminated
with Salmonella from faeces or from the butcher’s
hands during washing. For the comparison of our
findings with other studies several factors should be
considered, such as differences in origin, time period,
and  age  of  the  samples;
sampling  procedure;
contamination  level  of  animals; slaughterhouse

fleshy  parts 

to 

sanitation; cross-contamination of the products; and
differences in methodology applied for detection of
pathogens (8).

It is estimated that nearly 90% use of all antibiotic
agents  is  in  food  animals, given  either  at  sub-
therapeutic  concentrations  prophylactically  or  in
order  to  promote  growth.  The  40%  of  antibiotic
production in the USA was for use in stock feeds,
which 
included  55%-60%  of  penicillin  and
tetracycline (13).

Ampicillin  resistance  was  observed  in  all  the
isolated serotype, which is in agreement with the
findings of Suresh et al. (14); they also observed a
higher proportion of ampicillin-resistant salmonella
strains  isolated  from  eggs.  The  resistance  to
tetracycline was observed in 94.73% of the isolates,
which  is  higher  than  that  reported  in  different
studies: 46.6% in Senegal (15) and 36% in Portugal
(16).  Tetracycline  has  been  one  of  the  most
commonly used antibiotics for production animals;
from  day-old  chicks  to  broiler  chickens,  they  are
exposed to antimicrobial drugs during their growth
phase.  Therefore,  resistance  to  drugs  such  as
tetracycline could be expected since the members of
this class (chlortetracycline and oxytetracycline) are

458

A. Hussain SOOMRO, M. KHASKHELI, M. B. BHUTTO, G. SHAH, A. MEMON, P. DEWANI

approved for use in broiler feeds for the purpose of
growth promotion (17). Resistance to streptomycin
(92.10%) was also higher and is in conformity with
other findings (18). This resistance to tetracycline
and streptomycin commonly observed among the
Salmonella isolates has been frequently reported; this
elevated resistance may be explained by the possible
diffusion of the tet (A) resistance gene observed in
an  epidemiological  study  with  Salmonella  strains
isolated from animals (19). The Salmonellae revealed
resistance to nalidixic acid (60.52%). Recently, some
authors  have  reported  an  increase  in  quinolone
resistance  in  Salmonella  (20).  This  is  a  worrying
finding 
is
chromosomally mediated, thus allowing an increase
of  Salmonella  quinolone  resistant  in  humans  or
animals (19). On the other hand, no resistance to
ciprofloxacin was observed, which is in accordance
with  Cardoso  et  al.  (18).  Ciprofloxacin  is  a
fluoroquinolone antimicrobial that is increasingly
and  successfully  used 
treatment  of
septicaemic salmonellosis in humans. Our findings
regarding kanamycin resistance (2.6%) are almost in
agreement  with  the  2.8%  found  in  Salmonella
enteritidis isolated from a poultry slaughterhouse in
Spain (21).

quinolone 

resistance 

for 

the 

because 

References
1.

Anonymous: Pakistan economic survey 2008-09. Government
of  Pakistan,  Finance  Division,  Economic  Advisor’s  Wing,
Islamabad, 2008: 32-34.
Baird-Parker, A.C.: Foodborne Salmonellosis. Lancet, 1990; 336:
1231-1235.
Rajashekara, G., Harverly, E., Halvorson, D.A., Ferris, K.E.,
Lauer,  D.C.,  Nagaraja,  K.V.:  Multidrug  resistant  Salmonella
typhimurium DT104 in poultry. J. Food Prot., 2000; 63: 155-161.
Forsythe,  S.J.,  Hayes,  P.R.:  Food  hygiene,  microbiology  and
HACCP. Gaithersburg: Aspen Publishers, Inc., 1998.
Butt, T., Ahmad, R., Mahmood, M., Zaidi, S.: Ciprofloxacin
treatment failure in typhoid fever case, Pakistan. Emerg. Infec.
Dis., 2003; 9: 1621-1622.
Bauer, A.W., Kirby, W.M., Sherris, J.C.: Antibiotic susceptibility
testing by a standard single disc method. Amer. J. Clin. Pathol.,
1996; 45: 493-496.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7. Mead, G. C.: Food poisoning Salmonella in the poultry meat

industry. Br. Food J., 1990; 92: 32-36.

The uncontrolled use of the antimicrobial agents
in  food  animals  may  have  contributed  to  the
development of the pattern of resistance observed.
The lack of stringent regulations and monitoring in
dispensing of antibiotics in veterinary establishments
as well as the mass inoculation of herds of animals by
some farmers has been raised as a contributory factor
in  the  increase  in  antibiotic  resistance.  Therefore,
vigilance against the rise in resistance of Salmonellae
to antibiotics is essential.

The  present  study  underlines  the  need  for
adequate consumer protection against Salmonella. In
order to prevent zoonotic Salmonella serovars from
entering the food chain, bacteriological monitoring of
broiler flocks and separation of infected flocks from
food production together with introduction of good
manufacturing practices and hygiene control must be
implemented.

the 

The present study gives a clear perspective on the
extent of Salmonella contamination in broiler chicken
meat marketed in Hyderabad, Pakistan. Keeping in
several  possibilities  of  Salmonella
view 
contamination  in  the  poultry  industry,  specific
epidemiological studies on the spread of Salmonella
at various levels of production are needed on a long-
term basis.

8.

9.

Uyttendaele,  M.,  De  Troy,  P.,  Debevere,  J.:  Incidence  of
Salmonella,  Campylobacter  jejuni,  Campylobacter  coli, and
Listeria monocytogenes in poultry carcasses and different types
of poultry products for sale on the Belgian retail market. J. Food
Prot., 1999; 62: 735-740.
Plummer,  R.A.S.,  Blissett,  S.J.,  Dodd,  C.E.R.:  Salmonella
contamination of retail chicken products sold in the UK. J.Food
Prot., 1995; 58: 843-846.

10. Rusul,  G.,  Khair,  J.,  Radu,  S.,  Cheah,  C.T.,  Yassin,  R.M.:
Prevalence of Salmonella in broilers at retail outlets, processing
plants and farms in Malaysia. Inter. J. Food Microbiol., 1996;
33: 183-194.

11. Cardinale, E., Gros-Claude, J.D.P., Rivoal, K., Rose, V., Tall, F.,
Mead, G.C., Salvat, G.: Epidemiological analysis of Salmonella
enterica spp. enterica serovars Hadar, Brancaster and Enteritidis
from humans and broiler chickens in Senegal using pulsed-field
gel  electrophoresis  and  antibiotic  susceptibility. J.  Appl.
Microbiol., 2005; 99: 968-977.

459

Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella serovars isolated from poultry meat in Hyderabad, Pakistan

18. Cardoso, M.O., Ribeiro, A.R., Santos, L.R., Pilotto, F., Moraes,
H.L.S., Salle, C.T.P., Rocha, S.L.S., Nascimento, V. P.: Antibiotic
resistance  in  Salmonella  Enteritidis  isolated  from  broiler
carcasses. Braz. J. Microbiol., 2006; 37: 368-371.
Pezzella, C., Ricci, A., Di Giannatale, E., Luzzi, I., Carattoli, A.:
Tetracycline and streptomycin resistance genes, transposons,
and plasmids in Salmonella enterica isolated from animals in
Italy. Antimicrob. Agents Chemoth., 2004; 48: 903-908.

19.

20. Molbak,  K.,  Gerner-Smidt,  P.,  Wegerner,  H.C.:  Increasing
quinolone resistance in Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis.
Emerg. Infec. Dis., 2002; 8: 514-515.

21. Carraminana,  J.J.,  Rota,  C.,  Agustin,  I.,  Herrera,  A.:  High
prevalence of multiple resistance to antibiotics in Salmonella
serovars isolated from a poultry slaughterhouse in Spain. Vet.
Microbiol., 2004; 104: 133-139.

13.

12. Orji, M. U., Onuigbo, H. C., Mbata, T.I.: Isolation of Salmonella
from poultry droppings and other environmental sources in
Awka, Nigeria. Inter. J. Infec. Dis., 2005; 9: 86-89.
Prescott, J.F.: Antibiotics: miracle drugs or pig food? Canad. Vet.
J., 1997; 38: 763-766.
Suresh,  T.,  Hatha,  A.A.M.,  Sreenivasan,  D.,  Sangeetha,  N.,
Lashmanaperumalsamy,  P.:  Prevalence  and  antimicrobial
resistance of Salmonella enteritidis and other salmonellas in the
eggs and egg-storing trays from retails markets of Coimbatore,
South India. Food Microbiol. 2006; 23: 294-299.

14.

15. Bada-Alambedji,  R.,  Fofana,  A.,  Sedi,  M.,  Akakpo,  A.J.:
Antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella isolated from poultry
carcasses in Dakar (Senegal). Braz. J. Microbiol., 2006; 37: 510-
515.

16. Antunes, P., Reu, C., Souza, J.C., Peixe, L., Pestana, N.: Incidence
of Salmonella from poultry products and their susceptibility to
antimicrobial agents. Int. J. Food Microbiol., 2003; 82: 97-103.
Jones,  F.T.,  Ricke,  S.C.:  Observations  on  the  history  of  the
development of antimicrobials and their use in poultry feeds.
Poul. Sci., 2003; 82: 613-617.

17.

460

Copyright of Turkish Journal of Veterinary & Animal Sciences is the property of Scientific and Technical
Research Council of Turkey and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv
without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.

