Antibiotic resistance proﬁles among mesophilic aerobic bacteria in Nigerian

chicken litter and associated antibiotic resistance genes1

Olayeni Stephen Olonitola,2,∗ Nicole Fahrenfeld,† and Amy Pruden‡

∗Department of Microbiology, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria KD 810006, Nigeria; †Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 96 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway,
NJ 08854; and ‡Via Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061

ABSTRACT The effect of global antibiotic use prac-
tices in livestock on the emergence of antibiotic re-
sistant pathogens is poorly understood. There is a
paucity of data among African nations, which suffer
from high rates of antibiotic resistant infections among
the human population. Escherichia (29.5%), Staphylo-
coccus (15.8%), and Proteus (15.79%) were the domi-
nant bacterial genera isolated from chicken litter from
four different farms in Zaria, Nigeria, all of which
contain human pathogenic members. Escherichia iso-
lates were uniformly susceptible to augmentin and ce-
furoxime, but resistant to sulfamethoxazole (54.5%),
ampicillin (22.7%), ciprofloxacin (18.2%), cephalothin
(13.6%) and gentamicin (13.6%). Staphylococcus iso-
lates were susceptible to ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, and

sulfamethoxazole, but resistant to tetracycline (86.7%),
erythromycin (80%), clindamycin (60%), and penicillin
(33.3%). Many of the isolates (65.4%) were resistant
to multiple antibiotics, with a multiple antibiotic re-
sistance index (MARI) ≥ 0.2. sul1, sul2, and vanA
were the most commonly detected antibiotic resis-
tance genes among the isolates. Chicken litter asso-
ciated with antibiotic use and farming practices in
Nigeria could be a public health concern given that
the antibiotic resistant patterns among genera con-
taining pathogens indicate the potential
for antibi-
otic treatment failure. However, the MARI values
were generally lower than reported for Escherichia
coli
from intensive poultry operations in industrial
nations.

INTRODUCTION

Antibiotic resistance is one of the greatest human
health challenges of our time and the case has been
made that the world is dangerously close to a return
to the pre-antibiotic era (Chander et al., 2007). There
is growing concern and evidence (Rinsky et al., 2013)
that agricultural antibiotic use may be contributing sig-
nificantly to increased rates of antibiotic resistance. In
many countries, the majority of antibiotics used are
administered to livestock, and in the United States
and many countries the majority is for prophylactic
purposes or to stimulate growth promotion. Of par-
ticular concern are antibiotics that are used both in

C(cid:3) 2015 Poultry Science Association Inc.
Received June 11, 2014.
Accepted January 17, 2015.
1The authors express appreciation to the Council for International
Exchange of Scholars/Institute of International Education, U.S. De-
partment of State (Fulbright Scholars), and the Embassy of the United
States of America, Abuja, Nigeria, for the award of the Fulbright
African Research Scholar Program (ARSP) grant to enable Olayeni
Stephen Olonitola participation in this study at Virginia Tech, Blacks-
burg, VA. Financial support was provided by the Institute of Critical
Technology and Applied Science at Virginia Tech (TSTS 11–26).

2Corresponding author: olonisteve@gmail.com

1

2015 Poultry Science 00:1–8
http://dx.doi.org/10.3382/ps/pev069

human and livestock medicine, such as third gener-
ation cephalosporins (Collignon et al., 2013), though
even use of distinct antibiotics poses a risk for cross-
selection or coselection of resistance to human antibi-
otics (Hedges and Shannon, 1984) and can stimulate
horizontal gene transfer [i.e., transfer of antibiotic re-
sistance genes (ARG) among bacteria] (Gillings and
Stokes, 2012).

Livestock populations have been found to be reser-
voirs of several critical antibiotic resistant human
pathogens, including vancomycin-resistant Enterococci
(Bates, 1997). In many other countries and much of the
developing world, the use of antibiotics in livestock is
unregulated and a prescription is not required even for
human use (Hart and Kariuki, 1998). In general, an-
tibiotic use in livestock in Africa (Siwela et al., 2007) is
unrestricted. Thus, antibiotic use practices vary widely
across the globe and there is an opportunity to learn
about their general effects by comparing antibiotic re-
sistance patterns among livestock from different regions
of the world. In particular, although much effort has
been directed at improving the poor circumstances of
public health in Africa, little is known about the status
of antimicrobial resistance in African livestock popula-
tions or potential linkages to human illness.

2

STEPHEN OLONITOLA ET AL.

Poultry are of particular interest given their re-
ported linkage with vancomycin-resistant Enterococci
infections in humans in European studies (Hayes et al.,
2004). Unlike the intensive poultry farming as practiced
essentially in urban settings, “free range” farming is
the major form in the rural and peri-urban areas of
Nigeria where modern facilities such as electricity sup-
plies are not available, and is usually intended for lo-
cal consumption (Ajala et al., 2008). It involves ex-
tensive rearing of birds around households on a small
to medium scale basis, allows for extensive movement
(outside of nonconfining enclosures) and exposure to
sunlight, and requires affordable capital inputs since
the birds feed mainly by scavenging. Also local breeds
of bird (Gallus domesticus) are mostly used. The turn-
over rates are high and the protein needs of the poor
households are partially met. It is also thought to
be a relatively sustainable and cost effective practice.
Large scale poultry farming is usually practiced in ur-
ban areas where available lands for extensive rearing
of birds are lacking (Kperegbeyi et al., 2009). This
practice is also sometimes called commercial or in-
dustrial poultry farming, and involves thousands of
birds grown in complete confinement (battery system
or deep litter system). The main characteristics of
large scale poultry farms are: use of exotic breeds of
birds, use of specially formulated feeds, use of vac-
cines, and availability of electricity (Kperegbeyi et al.,
2009).

Unfortunately, antibiotic use policies are rarely en-
forced in Nigeria and antibiotics are widely used in
poultry farming without oversight (Nsofor et al., 2013;
Okonko et al., 2010). Recent surveys (n = 30) in-
dicated that >83% of poultry farmers use tetracy-
clines, 50% use tylosin, 40% use gentamicin, and
<30% use enrofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, penicillin, strep-
tomycin, furazolidone, chloramphenicol, and ampicil-
llin (Nsofor et al., 2013). In the southeastern region of
Nigeria, antimicrobial agents were reportedly incorpo-
rated directly into poultry feeds, and available with-
out veterinary consult (Nsofor et al., 2013). Among
the antibiotics available, tetracycline appears to be
the most widely used in African poultry feeds and
in some instances as much as 100% of the bacterial
isolates from these feeds were resistant to the antibi-
otics tested (i.e., ampicillin, ampiclox, carbenicillin,
ceflaximide, chloramphenicol, ciprocin, ciprofloxacin,
cotrimoxazole, erythromycin, floxapen, gentamicin, lin-
cocin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin, penicillin, polymyxin B,
reflacine, rifampicin, streptomycin, tetracycline, and
vancomycin) (Okonko et al., 2010). These findings are
similar to those from other parts of the country such as
in northeastern Nigeria (Geidam et al., 2012). These
workers observed varying levels of resistances to an-
tibiotics among bacteria isolated from chicken in their
studies. This suggests that antibacterial resistances in
isolates associated with poultry farms are rampant
in Nigeria and portend dangers of treatment failures
in cases of infection with such isolates. The demand for

poultry is growing in Nigeria, and the resulting poultry
litter is used for fertilizing crops and in fisheries.

The purpose of this study was to examine the antibi-
otic resistance patterns among mesophilic chicken lit-
ter bacteria isolated from four different farms in Zaria,
northwestern Nigeria. Of particular interest were the
distributions of ARGs in the Escherichia and Staphylo-
coccus genera, which contain several pathogenic mem-
bers of concern to human health and are increasingly
subject to antibiotic treatment failure. Knowledge of
the distribution of antibiotic resistant bacteria and
ARGs in chicken litter from representative Nigerian
chicken farms can provide a point of comparison to
countries with varying rearing and antibiotic use prac-
tices. Further, identification of potential pathogens that
are resistant to important human antibiotics indicates
the need for greater attention on ways to prevent and
control the spread of antibiotic resistance from livestock
operations in developing countries with few antibiotic
use restrictions.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Sample Collection

Four hundred fresh (nonrepeat) poultry fecal drop-
pings were aseptically collected in sterile McCartney
bottles from layers in 2 commercial/intensive chicken
farms [Department of Animal Science poultry farm,
Main Campus, Ahmadu Bello University (i.e., CM) and
Accord Farms, Batch C (i.e., C)] and 2 small scale
free range farms [Fulani Rarer (i.e., FR) and Area F
quarter (i.e., F)] between the hours of 7 and 9 AM
over a period of 6 wk (June 4 to July 13, 2012). The
farms are located in different parts of Zaria metropolis
(Table 1). Samples were immediately transported on ice
to the laboratory for analyses (Adeleke and Omafuvbe,
2011; Siwela et al., 2007). A total of 250 samples were
randomly selected for the current study.

Isolation and Identiﬁcation of Bacterial
Strains

Ten grams of

fecal droppings were homogenized
with 90 mL maximum recovery diluents (MRD,
Oxoid) to obtain 1:10 dilution. Serial dilutions were
prepared up to 10−5. A volume of 0.1 mL of the
10−3, 10−4, and 10−5 dilutions were plated out on the
following agar media for maximum recovery of aero-
bic mesophilic bacteria: mannitol salt agar-CM0085,
Oxoid (Hampshire, United Kingdom) (Staphylococcus
and related organisms), bile-aesculin agar-CM0888,
Oxoid (Enterococcus), MacConkey agar-CM 0115,
Oxoid and Salmonella–Shigella agar-CM0099, Oxoid
(Enterobacteriaceae). The agar plates were incubated
at 37◦C for up to 24 h. Representative colonies were se-
lected based on their morphological characteristics and
purified on nutrient agar. Tentative biochemical iden-
tification of isolates was carried out based on standard

ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE IN NIGERIAN POULTRY LITTER

3

Table 1. Information about the 4 farms from where samples were collected.

Antibiotic used

Feed

Breed of bird

Life stage

Age of farm

Farm
identifier

CM1

C2

FR3

Oxytetracycline,
tylosin, neomycin,
chloramphenicol
Gentamicin,
doxycycline,
chloramphenicol,
tylosin, neomycin,
amoxycillin
None

Self-compounding OR
Hybreed, Vitalfeed,
Animal Care, Sovetfeed
Self-compounding OR
vitafeed, Robson feed,
Hybreed

Isa brown, Black harco

15 mo

>30 yr

Nova Nera (brown)

14 mo

12 yr

Local grain chaffs

Local breeds5

ND

ND

ND

ND

Farming practice
description

Intensive, deep litter
farming system

Intensive, deep litter
farming system

Extensive, local
scavenging,
supplemented with
local grain chaffs
Extensive, local
scavenging,
supplemented with
local grain chaffs

F4

None

Local grain chaffs

Local breeds5

1CM = Department of Animal Science Poultry Farm, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria.
2C = Accord Farms, Kwangila, Zaria (Batch C birds).
3FR = Fulani Rearer, Hayin Dogo, Zaria.
4F = Area F (household farm), Zaria.
5Birds likely coming in contact with commercial feed wastes/antibiotics while roaming.

procedures (Cheesbrough, 2006). Isolates were identi-
fied by sequencing the 16S rRNA gene, as described
below.

Antibiotic Susceptibility Studies

The agar disc diffusion method as recommended
by CLSI (2006) was employed. In all, 17 antibiotics
were selected and screened for their inhibitory ef-
fects on the isolates based on the procedures of CLSI
(2006) and as reported by other workers (Olonitola
et al., 2007). Escherichia isolates were tested for re-
sistance to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (Aug), ampi-
cillin (Amp), cefotaxime (Cef), cephalothin (Cep),
ciprofloxacin (Cip), gentamicin (Gen), nitrofurantoin
(Nit), and trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole (Cot).
Staphylococcus isolates were tested for resistance to
Cip, clindamycin (Cli), erythromycin (Ery), Gen, lin-
zolid (Lin), oxacillin (Oxa), penicillin (Pen), quino-
pristin/dalfopristin (Qui), rifampicin (Rif), tetracy-
cline (Tet), Cot, and vancomycin (Van).

Multiple Antibiotics Resistance Indexing of
Isolates

Multiple antibiotic resistance indexing (MARI) was
based on the procedures of Krumperman (1983). MARI
is defined as a/b where “a” represents the number of
antibiotics to which an isolate is resistant and “b” the
number of antibiotics against which the isolate is tested.
An MARI ≥ 0.2 is regarded to have originated from
environments where antibiotics are frequently used.

Molecular Studies
Individual colonies,

in duplicate, were suspended
in molecular biology grade water (10 μL), boiled for

10 min, and this solution was used directly for PCR.
Prior to Sanger sequencing (Virginia Bioinformat-
ics Institute, Blacksburg, VA), samples were ampli-
fied using 8F/1492R primers targeting the V3 re-
gion of the 16S rRNA gene (Weisburg et al., 1991).
Duplicate sequences were aligned and trimmed us-
ing DNA Baser
(Heracle BioSoft S.R.L., Pitesti,
Romania) with settings for low quality sequences.
Multiple sequence alignment was performed using
ClustalW and maximum likelihood trees were con-
structed in MEGA5 (Tamura et al., 2011). The Ba-
sic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) alignment
tool (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/) was used
to identify sequences in GenBank with the highest sim-
ilarity to the isolated bacteria. BLAST classifications
were verified using the Ribosomal Database Project
(Wang et al., 2007). Sequences are available in Euro-
pean Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) under ac-
cession number LK985325-LK985383.

Testing for presence of ARGs was performed as previ-
ously described (Pei et al., 2006) in 25 μL reactions with
MasterTaq polymerase (5 Prime, Gaithersburg, MD)
for ermF (Chen et al., 2007), mecA (Volkmann et al.,
2004), sul1 (Pei et al., 2006), sul2 (Pei et al., 2006),
tet(O) (Aminov et al., 2001), tet(W) (Aminov et al.,
2001), and vanA (Clark et al., 1993). These genes were
selected to represent a range of ARG representing genes
related to antibiotics used at some of the test sites (e.g.,
tet genes for tetracycline, ermF gene for macrolides, and
mecA for methicillin) and vanA given that it is consid-
ered an antibiotic of last resort. No template controls
were included in each run. Detection of ARGs was con-
firmed by agarose gel electrophoresis.

Analysis of Similarity (ANOSIM) analysis was per-
formed on transformed ARG presence/absence data
and antibiotic susceptibility data using Primer 6 statis-
tical software (PrimerE, Ivy Bridge, United Kingdom).

4

STEPHEN OLONITOLA ET AL.

Table 2. Observed resistance rates among isolates to each
antibiotic tested.

Table 3. Escherichia resistance patterns for A) ARG and B)
susceptibility tests.

Antibiotics

Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (Aug)
Ampicillin (Amp)
Cefotaxime (Cef)
Cephalothin (Cep)
Ciprofloxacin (Cip)
Clindamycin (Cli)
Erythromycin (Ery)
Gentamicin (Gen)
Linzolid (Lin)
Nitrofurantoin (Nit)
Oxacillin (Oxa)
Penicillin (Pen)
Quinopristin/dalfopristin (Qui)
Rifampicin (Rif)
Tetracycline (Tet)
Trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole
(Cot)
Vancomycin (Van)

Escherichia
% resistant,

n = 22

Staphylococcus
% resistant,

n = 15

0
22.7
0
13.6
18.2

13.6

4.5

54.5

0
60.0
80.0
0
13.3

13.3
33.3
26.7
13.3
86.7
0

13.3

RESULTS

Identiﬁcation of Culturable Bacteria and
Their Antibiotic Resistance Patterns

Culturable aerobic mesophilic bacteria in the chicken
droppings were found to be dominated by Es-
cherichia (29.47%), Staphylococcus (15.79%), and Pro-
teus (15.79%), based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing
of a representative subset of isolates (95 out of 250).
Other common isolates (>9%) were highest in sequence
similarity to Alcaligenes, Pseudomonas, Salmonella,
Enterobacter, Klebsiella, and Bacillus. Some of the less
commonly encountered genera included Consenzaea,
Providencia, Lysinibacillus, and Wohlfartiimonas.

A broad range of antimicrobial

resistance pat-
terns were observed among the isolates (Tables 2–4).
Escherichia were uniformly susceptible to augmentin
and cefotaxime, while Staphylococcus were uni-
formly susceptible to ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, and
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Over eighty percent of
Staphylococcus isolates were resistant to tetracycline
(Table 2). Many of the isolates were characterized by a
MARI ≥ 0.2 (Figure 1). Multiple antibiotic resistance
was extreme with one particular Staphylococcus isolate,
which was resistant to 9 antibiotics (Table 4). Among
the ARGs tested, the most commonly identified were
sul1, sul2, and vanA (Tables 3 and 4).

Comparison of Antibiotic Resistance
Patterns across Farms

ANOSIM analysis of disc and ARG resistance suites
indicated that there was a difference in antibiotic re-
sistance patterns between CM and F (P = 0.001) and
CM and FR (P = 0.012) sample sites for Escherichia.
In contrast, no differences in resistance patterns were
observed between C and either F (P = 0.30) or FR

A

Number of

ARGs present

Number of
isolates with

pattern

0
1
2

3

5
11
7

4

B

Number of
antibiotics

Number of
isolates with

pattern

0
1

2

4
5

7
7

6

1
1

Resistance pattern (number
isolates exhibiting pattern)

None
sul1 (1); sul2 (5); vanA (5)
sul1/sul2 (1); sul1/vanA (2);
sul2/vanA (4)
sul1/sul2/vanA (4)
Resistance pattern (number
isolates exhibiting pattern)

None
Amp1 (1), Cep2 (1), Cot3 (4),
Nit4 (1)
Amp/Cot (3); Gen5/Cot (1);
Cip6/Cot (2)
Cep/Cip/Gen/Cot
Amp/Cep/Cip/Gen/Cot

1Amp = Ampicillin.
2Cep = Cephalothin.
3Cot = Trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole.
4Nit = Nitrofurantoin.
5Gen = Gentamicin.
6Cip = Ciprofloxacin.

Table 4. Staphylococcus resistance patterns for A) ARG and
B) susceptibility tests.

Resistance pattern (number
isolates exhibiting pattern)

None
sul2 (1); vanA (1)
sul1/vanA (1); sul2/vanA (1)
Resistance pattern (number
isolates exhibiting pattern)

None
Tet1
Tet/Ery2
Oxa3/Pen4/Rif5 (1);
Ery/Qui6/Tet (1);
Cli7/Ery/Tet (5)
Cli/Ery/Pen/Tet
Cli/Ery/Pen/Qui/Tet
Cli/Ery/Lin8/Pen/Qui/
Tet/Van9
Cli/Ery/Lin/Oxa/Pen/Rif/
Qui/Tet/Van

A

B

Number of

ARGs present

Number of
isolates with

pattern

0
1
2

6
2
2

Number of
antibiotics

Number of
isolates with

pattern

0
1
2
3

4
5
7

9

1
1
2
7

1
1
1

1

1Tet = Tetracycline.
2Ery = Erythromycin.
3Oxa = Oxacillin.
4Pen = Penicillin.
5Rif = Rifampicin.
6Qui = Quinopristin/dalfopristin.
7Cli = Clindamycin.
8Lin = Linzolid.
9Van = Vancomycin.

(P = 0.35) sites for Escherichia. There was a differ-
ence (P = 0.022) between commercial farm CM and
free range farm FR for the Staphylococcus isolates.

Staphylococcus isolates from free range farms were
resistant to zero or 3 antibiotics, while isolates from

ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE IN NIGERIAN POULTRY LITTER

5

imal Science Farm and Accord Farms 4 isolates con-
tained one ARG and 4 contained 2 ARGs. ARGs were
detected in neither of 2 Staphylococcus isolates from the
Area F farm/Fulani Rearer farm, while resistance pat-
terns of zero, one, and 2 ARGs were each observed in
4 isolates from the Accord Farms/Department of An-
imal Science farm. For Staphylococcus, one strain was
vancomycin resistant and tested positive for the vanA
gene, 2 strains had the gene but were susceptible to
vancomycin, and one strain displayed resistance to van-
comycin but the vanA gene was not detected. Of the 22
Escherichia isolates tested for both susceptibility and
ARGs, 8 were resistant to Cot and contained the sul2
gene, 4 were resistant to Cot and contained both sul1
and sul2 genes, while the rest demonstrated no resis-
tance to Cot and either contained the sul1 and sul2
genes (one isolate), contained sul2 gene (3 isolates), or
contained neither sul gene tested (6 isolates). In con-
trast, no resistance to Cot was observed in Staphylococ-
cus isolates while 2 isolates tested positive for the sul2
gene and one carried the sul1 gene.

DISCUSSION

This study provides insight into the status of an-
timicrobial resistance in poultry litter in northwestern
Nigeria. This part of the world is of particular interest
given that antimicrobials are widely used in livestock
and poorly controlled and that little data is available on
the effects of varying rearing practices. Further, human
populations in Africa are susceptible to relatively high
rates of antibiotic resistance bacterial infection (Pablos-
M´endez et al., 1998). Thus, a larger concern is not just
the presence of potentially pathogenic bacteria resis-
tant to antibiotics in poultry litter, but their poten-
tial to spread through the environment and to humans,
given the local farming practices. Others have observed,
in both developing and industrialized nations, that a
wide range of ARGs from agricultural operations can
disseminate and persist in affected environments (Pei
et al., 2006). In particular, high levels of ARGs have
been measured in poultry litter from intensive poultry
facilities (Diarrassouba et al., 2007).

Association of Genera Isolated with
Human Pathogens

Of particular concern is that many of bacterial
genera isolated are associated with important human
pathogens. The identification of the isolates obtained
were generally consistent with a previous report from
Ile-Ife, southwestern Nigeria (Adeleke and Omafuvbe,
2011), though a few differences were noted. In partic-
ular, Corynebacterium, Acinetobacter, and Aeromonas
were reported in the Ile-Ife study and not found
in the present study, while Providentcia, Cocenzaea,
Lysinibacillus, Wolhfahrtiimonas, Klebsiella, and En-
terobacter were encountered in this study, but not the

Figure 1. Multiple antibiotic resistance index (MARI) for A) Es-

cherichia (N = 22), B) Staphylococcus isolates (N = 15).

the commercial/intensive farms (Department of Ani-
mal Science Farm and Accord Farms) were resistant to
one to 7 antibiotics. No resistance was the most com-
monly observed pattern for isolates from the free range
farms (Fulani Rearer Farm and Area F Farm); however
the isolates with the highest MARI, those resistant to 4
of 5 antibiotics, were also observed from the free range
farms. The most commonly observed resistance pattern
for isolates from the commercial farms was to one an-
tibiotic (n = 6).

Escherichia isolated from free range farms (9 isolates
total) were resistant to zero up to 5 antibiotics, with no
resistance the most commonly observed pattern (4 iso-
lates). Escherichia isolated from commercial farms (13
isolates) were resistant to zero to 3 antibiotics with re-
sistance to one antibiotic the most commonly observed
(6 isolates). Therefore, while Escherichia isolates with
the highest MARI were found on free range farms, a
higher incidence of resistance (10/13 on commercial vs.
5/9) was observed for isolates from commercial farms.
Of the 7 ARGs investigated in this study (ermF,
mecA, sul1, sul2, tetO, tetW, and vanA) only sul1, sul2,
and vanA were detected. For Escherichia, sul1, sul2,
and vanA were detected in isolates on each type of farm.
Most isolates from the Area F farm/Fulani Rearer farm
(7/15) contained one ARG, for the Department of An-

6

STEPHEN OLONITOLA ET AL.

Ile-Ife study. These discrepancies could be affected
by the geographical differences (Ile-Ife is in south-
western Nigeria) (Ojo et al., 2012) or differences in
isolation techniques. Nonetheless, most of the univer-
sally reported organisms in poultry fecal samples, in-
cluding Escherichia, Shigella, Staphylococcus, Proteus,
Salmonella, and Bacillus were isolated in both stud-
ies. In addition, the 2 studies encountered higher num-
bers of Gram negative than Gram positive bacteria, as
might be expected given these bacteria are normal flora
of the intestinal tract of poultry birds (Hemen et al.,
2012). Interestingly, some of the bacteria encountered,
including Bacillus, Escherichia, Staphylococcus, Pseu-
domonas, and Salmonella have been isolated liberally
from commercial chicken feeds in Calabar, the south-
ernmost geopolitical zone of Nigeria (Okonko et al.,
2010), suggesting that potentially pathogenic antibiotic
resistant bacteria could easily be circulated via feeding
operations.

Observed Patterns of Antibiotic Resistance
and Implications

This study confirms that resistant strains of sev-
eral bacteria are circulating in Nigerian poultry op-
erations, as reported in other studies (Nsofor et al.,
2013). Escherichia displayed a high rate of resis-
tance to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (tested on
same disc) (54.5%), ampicillin (22.7%), ciprofloxacin
(18.2%), cephalothin (13.6%), and gentamicin (13.6%).
However, the resistance rates among isolates in the
present study appear to be generally lower than some of
those previously reported cases in Nigeria, which ranged
from 60 to 100% resistances in most instances (Geidam
et al., 2012; Ojo et al., 2012). The lower percentage
resistance observed in the current study may be due
to the fact that laying hens were studied, rather than
broilers. van den Bogaard et al. (2001) reported that
bacterial infections occur less frequently in layers than
in young broilers and consequently less antibiotics tend
to be used.

While a high level of indiscriminate use of antimi-
crobials in animals has been reported, due to weak en-
forcement of antibiotic use policies (Ojo et al., 2012),
findings of the current study suggest that overuse of an-
tibiotics may not be prominent on medium/small scale
poultry farms in northwestern Nigeria. This may be in
part because use of antibiotics in laying birds presents
additional cost to farmers that may not present benefits
for outputs of laying hens. Still, the rate of Escherichia
resistances observed in the present study agree with
those reported in Australia (Obeng et al., 2012), where
use of antimicrobials in animal production is regu-
lated and enforced. Studies of intensive chicken farms in
north east Georgia, United States indicated that 75%
of E. coli isolates from chicken litter were resistant to
3 or more antibiotics (Smith et al., 2007), whereas the
present study noted 91% of isolates to be resistant to

2 or fewer antibiotics. This is consistent with observa-
tions of lower rates of antibiotic resistance on organic
versus commercial poultry farms in the United States
(Sapkota et al., 2011).

The observed resistance rate to the fluoroquinolone
antibiotic, ciprofloxacin (18.2%), is comparable to the
16.7% reported by Ojo et al. (2012), but is in contrast
to 0% resistance reported by some researchers (Olaitan
et al., 2011). Flouroquinolones are not used in animal
production in Nigeria, due to the high costs, but pos-
sible exposure to less potent and adulterated antibi-
otics by humans sharing the same environments with
the farm animals may be responsible for the possible
emergence of resistance to these less misused antibi-
otics (Nsofor and Iroegbu, 2012). This study indicates
that even resistance to important human antibiotics not
used in livestock is possible when such antibiotics are
not being used and the need for comprehensive control
strategies. ANOSIM analysis indicated that patterns of
resistance were not necessarily strongly associated with
sample origin and therefore known antibiotic use; how-
ever, it is expected given a larger sample size such pat-
terns may become apparent given a larger sample size.
In this study, resistances to the tested antibiotics
were even higher in Staphylococcus than in Escherichia.
These findings are in agreement with Suleiman et al.
(2013) and further support the fact that antimicrobial
drug resistance rates among pathogen-containing gen-
era are a concern in Nigeria. This is corroborated by the
MARI of the bacterial isolates in the present study. At
least 61.5% (Staphylococcus) and 33.3% (Escherichia) of
the isolates were characterized by a MARI ≥ 0.2, which
is usually an indication that the isolates originated from
environments where antibiotics are frequently used
(Krumperman, 1983). It is also interesting to note that
65.4% of the Staphylococcus isolates expressed multiple
resistances to at least 3 antibiotics, particularly among
strains isolated from intensive/commercial farms where
antibiotic use is more common. Multiple antibiotic re-
sistances have previously been reported in Staphylococ-
cus in Nigeria (Okonko et al., 2010), suggesting that it
is probably a common occurrence around the country.

Distribution of Targeted ARGs

Of the 7 ARGs investigated in this study, only sul1,
sul2, and vanA were detected. The ARG vanA was the
most frequently detected among Staphylococcus (30%),
while sul2 was the most frequently detected in Es-
cherichia (77.2%). Still, vanA was detected in 68.2%
of Escherichia isolates.

Vancomycin is a narrow spectrum inhibitor of cell
wall synthesis in bacteria. Vancomycin is widely used
to treat many life-threatening human infections caused
by Gram positive bacteria (Sanakal and Kaliwal, 2011).
Resistance to vancomycin is mediated by the vanA gene
in Staphylococcus aureus (Chang et al., 2003) and it
was detected in 3 Staphylococcus isolates in the present

ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE IN NIGERIAN POULTRY LITTER

7

study. Detection of the vanA gene where resistance was
not demonstrated may be due to bacteria harboring an
inactive or damaged gene that is not longer functional,
which is possible given the length of insert the vanA
protocol targets. These results may indicate other genes
are involved in vancomycin resistance given that strains
displayed resistance without the gene.

Although vancomycin resistance is not indicated for
Escherichia, because it is a Gram negative bacterium,
several isolates carried the vanA gene. This suggests
that carrier strains that do not express resistance could
mediate horizontal gene transfer of resistance to criti-
cally important antibiotics (Kristiansson et al., 2011).
The genes sul1 and sul2 were frequently detected in
this study and detection of sul2 was often associated
with resistance to sulfamethoxazole. No isolates demon-
strated resistance to sulfamethoxaole without the detec-
tion of sul1 or sul2, but sul1 and sul2 were also detected
in some isolates that did not demonstrate resistance
to sulfamethoxaole. This indicates that ARGs may be
present, but inactive. Others have noted that sulfon-
amide resistance is common in bacteria from swine and
chickens (Kozak et al., 2009).

The mecA gene encodes resistance to methicillin.
Although some of the Staphylococcus isolates were
resistant to oxacillin, none of them carried mecA
gene. Previous studies in Zaria, Nigeria, also failed to
detect the mecA gene, even in confirmed Methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) (Olayinka
et al., 2009; Olonitola et al., 2007), thus it was sug-
gested by Olayinka et al. (2009) that the MRSA phe-
notype observed in their isolates was not the classical
mecA-mediated resistance, but most probably due to
hyperproduction of β-lactamase.

In the case of tetracyclines, several genes confer re-
sistance by various mechanisms, whereas this study in-
vestigated the ribosomal protection factors tet(O) and
tet(W) and did not find them to be present in any of the
strains. Others have observed tet(A) and tet(B) in com-
mercial broiler chicken litter from British Columbia,
Canada (Diarrassouba et al., 2007).

The ermF gene confers resistance to macrolides, lin-
cosamides, and streptogramin B (Chung et al., 1999).
While several of the isolates displayed resistance to ery-
thromycin and clindamycin, the ermF gene was not
detected in any of the Staphylococcus isolates. Thus,
another gene may be responsible for the observed resis-
tance or the resistance was phenotypic in nature (Bae
et al., 2007).

CONCLUSIONS

Antibiotic

resistance patterns were profiled in
mesophilic aerobic bacterial isolates obtained from free
range and commercial chicken farms in Zaria, north-
western Nigeria, a part of the world with little data
to address the effect of farming practices on antibiotic
resistance. Of particular concern was that genera con-
taining pathogenic members were the most commonly

identified and that many of the antibiotic resistance
patterns indicated multiple antibiotic resistance and
potential for antibiotic treatment failure. Vancomycin
resistance was common among Staphylococcus isolates
and the vanA gene was the most frequently detected
of the ARGs assayed. Observed resistance rates in Es-
cherichia were lower than those observed in litter from
commercial chicken operations reported in industrial-
ized nations; however, Nigerian practices may increase
the potential for transfer to humans. For example, free
range farming practices, may present benefits from high
turnover rates and low animal counts per acre, but in-
crease potential for human contact and infection trans-
fer compared to commercial farms. Further study is rec-
ommended to demonstrate which farming practices best
reduce antibiotic resistance levels and minimize the po-
tential to spread to humans.

REFERENCES

Adeleke, E., and B. Omafuvbe. 2011. Antibiotic resistance of aerobic
mesophilic bacteria isolated from poultry faeces. Res. J. Micro-
biol. 6:356–365.

Ajala, M. K., B. I. Nwagu, and E. O. Otchere. 2008. Socio-economics
of free-range poultry production among agropastoral women in
Giwa local government area of Kaduna State, Nigeria. Nigerian
Vet. J. 28:11–18.

Aminov, R., N. Garrigues-Jeanjean, and R. Mackie. 2001. Molecular
ecology of tetracycline resistance: Development and validation of
primers for detection of tetracycline resistance genes encoding
ribosomal protection proteins. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67:22–
32.

Bae, S. Y., J. S. Kim, J.-A. Kwon, S.-Y. Yoon, C. S. Lim, K. N.
Lee, Y. Cho, Y. K. Kim, and C. K. Lee. 2007. Phenotypes and
genotypes of macrolide-resistant Streptococcus pyogenes isolated
in Seoul, Korea. J. Med. Microbiol. 56:229–235.

Bates, J. 1997. Epidemiology of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in
the community and the relevance of farm animals to human in-
fection. J. Hosp. Infect. 37:89–101.

Chander, Y., S. C. Gupta, S. M. Goyal, and K. Kumar. 2007. An-

tibiotics: Has the magic gone? J Sci. Food Agric. 87:739–742.

Chang, S., D. M. Sievert, J. C. Hageman, M. L. Boulton, F. C. Ten-
over, F. P. Downes, S. Shah, J. T. Rudrik, G. R. Pupp, and W. J.
Brown. 2003. Infection with vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus containing the vanA resistance gene. New Engl. J. Med.
348:1342–1347.

Cheesbrough, M. 2006. District Laboratory Practice in Tropical

Countries. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK.

Chen, J., Z. Yu, F. C. Michel, T. Wittum, and M. Morrison.
2007. Development and application of real-time PCR assays for
quantification of erm genes conferring resistance to macrolides-
lincosamides-streptogramin B in livestock manure and manure
management systems. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73:4407–4416.

Chung, W. O., K. Young, Z. Leng, and M. C. Roberts. 1999. Mo-
bile elements carrying ermF and tetQ genes in Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 44:
329–335.

Clark, N. C., R. C. Cooksey, B. C. Hill, J. M. Swenson, and
F. C. Tenover. 1993. Characterization of glycopeptide-resistant
enterococci from U.S. hospitals. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
37:2311–2317.

Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI). 2006. Perfor-
mance Standards for Antimicrobial Disk Susceptibility Tests; Ap-
proved standard M2-A9. 26.

Collignon, P., F. Aarestrup, R. Irwin, and S. McEwen. 2013. Human
deaths and third-generation cephalosporin use in poultry, Europe.
Emerg. Infect. Dis 19:1339–40.

Diarrassouba, F., M. S. Diarra, S. Bach, P. Delaquis, J. Pritchard, E.
Topp, and B. J. Skura. 2007. Antibiotic resistance and virulence

8

STEPHEN OLONITOLA ET AL.

genes in commensal Escherichia coli and Salmonella isolates from
commercial broiler chicken farms. J. Food Prot. 70:1316–1327.

Geidam, Y. A., A. G. Ambali, and P. A. Onyeyili. 2012. Detec-
tion and antibiotic sensitivity pattern of avian pathogenic Es-
cherichia coli strains among rural chickens in the arid region of
north-eastern Nigeria. Vet. World. 5:325–329

Gillings, M. R., and H. W. Stokes. 2012. Are humans increasing

bacterial evolvability? Trends Ecol. Evolut. 27:346–352.

Hart, C. A., and S. Kariuki. 1998. Antimicrobial resistance in devel-

oping countries. Br. Med. J. 317:647–650.

Hayes, J. R., L. L. English, L. E. Carr, D. D. Wagner, and S. W.
Joseph. 2004. Multiple-antibiotic resistance of Enterococcus spp.
isolated from commercial poultry production environments. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 70:6005–6011.

Hedges, R. W., and K. P. Shannon. 1984. Resistance to apramycin
in Escherichia coli isolated from animals: Detection of a novel
aminoglycoside-modifying enzyme. J. Gen. Microbiol. 130:473–
482.

Hemen, J. T., J. T. Johnson, E. E. Ambo, V. S. Ekam, M. O. Odey,
and W. A. Fila. 2012. Multi-antibiotic resistance of some Gram
negative bacterial isolates from poultry litters of selected farms
in Benue State. Int. J. Sci. Technol. 3:543–547.

Kozak, G. K., D. L. Pearl, J. Parkman, R. J. Reid-Smith, A. Deckert,
and P. Boerlin. 2009. Distribution of sulfonamide resistance genes
in Escherichia coli and Salmonella isolates from swine and chick-
ens at abattoirs in Ontario and Qu´ebec, Canada. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 75:5999–6001.

Kperegbeyi, J., J. Meye, and E. Ogboi. 2009. Local chicken pro-
duction: Strategy of household poultry development in coastal
regions of Niger Delta, Nigeria. Af. J. Gen. Agric. 5:17–20.

Kristiansson, E., J. Fick, A. Janzon, R. Grabic, C. Rutgersson,
B. Weijdeg˚ard, H. S¨oderstr¨om, and D. G. J. Larsson. 2011. Py-
rosequencing of antibiotic-contaminated river sediments reveals
high levels of resistance and gene transfer elements. PLoS ONE
6:e17038.

Krumperman, P. H. 1983. Multiple antibiotic resistance indexing of
Escherichia coli to identify high-risk sources of fecal contamina-
tion of foods. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 46:165–170.

Nsofor, C. A., and C. U. Iroegbu. 2012. Antibiotic resistance pro-
file of Escherichia coli isolated from apparently healthy domestic
livestock in south-east Nigeria. J. Cell An. Biol. 6:129–135.

Nsofor, C. A., I. O. Olatoye, E. A. Amosun, C. U. Iroegbu, M. A.
Davis, L. H. Orfe, and D. R. Call. 2013. Escherichia coli from
Nigeria exhibit a high prevalence of antibiotic resistance where
reliance on antibiotics in poultry production is a potential con-
tributing factor. Af. J. Microbiol. Res. 7:4646–4654.

Obeng, A. S., H. Rickard, O. Ndi, M. Sexton, and M. Barton. 2012.
Antibiotic resistance, phylogenetic grouping and virulence po-
tential of Escherichia coli isolated from the faeces of intensively
farmed and free range poultry. Vet. Microbiol. 154:305–315.

Ojo, O. E., O. G. Ogunyinka, M. Agbaje, J. O. Okuboye, O. O.
Kehinde, and M. A. Oyekunle. 2012. Antibiogram of Enterobac-
teriaceae isolated from free-range chickens in Abeokuta, Nigeria.
Vet. Arch. 82:577–589.

Okonko, I., A. Nkang, E. Fajobi, O. Mejeha, A. Udeze, B. Motayo, A.
Ogun, T. Ogunnusi, and T. Babalola. 2010. Incidence of multi-
drug resistant (MDR) organisms in some poultry feeds sold in
Calabar metropolis, Nigeria. Electron. J. Environ. Agric. Food
Chem. 9:514–532.

Olaitan, J. O., O. B. Shittu, and A. A. Akinliba. 2011. Antibiotic
resistance of enteric bacteria isolated from duck droppings. J.
Appl. Biosci. 45:3008–3018.

Olayinka, B. O., A. T. Olayinka, A. F. Obajuluwa, J. A. Onaolapo,
and P. F. Olurinola. 2009. Absence of mecA gene in methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus isolates. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 3:49–
56.

Olonitola, O. S., B. O. Olayinka, and J. A. Onanolapo. 2007. Absence
of mecA gene in methicillin resistant Staphlococcus aureus isolated
from non-hospital sources in Zaria, Nigeria. Int. J. Nat. Appl. Sci.
3:160–164.

Pablos-M´endez, A., M. C. Raviglione, A. Laszlo, N. Binkin, H. L.
Rieder, F. Bustreo, D. L. Cohn, C. S. Lambregts-van Weezen-
beek, S. J. Kim, and P. Chaulet. 1998. Global surveillance for
antituberculosis-drug resistance, 1994–1997. New Engl. J. Med.
338:1641–1649.

Pei, R., S.-C. Kim, K. H. Carlson, and A. Pruden. 2006. Effect
of river landscape on the sediment concentrations of antibiotics
and corresponding antibiotic resistance genes (ARG). Water Res.
40:2427–2435.

Rinsky, J. L., M. Nadimpalli, S. Wing, D. Hall, D. Baron, L. B.
Price, J. Larsen, M. Stegger, J. Stewart, and C. D. Heaney.
2013. Livestock-associated methicillin and multidrug resistant
Staphylococcus aureus is present among industrial, not antibiotic-
free livestock operation workers in North Carolina. PLoS ONE
8:e67641.

Sanakal, R. D., and B. B. Kaliwal. 2011. Vancomycin resistance genes
in various organisms–An in silico study. Int. J. Biomet. Bioin-
form. 5:111–129.

Sapkota, A. R., R. M. Hulet, G. Zhang, P. McDermott, E. L. Kin-
ney, K. J. Schwab, and S. W. Joseph. 2011. Lower prevalence
of antibiotic-resistant Enterococci on U.S. conventional poultry
farms that transitioned to organic practices. Environ. Health Per-
spect. 119: 1622–1628.

Siwela, A., F. Matsaure, T. Ncube, O. Olonitola, and G. Best. 2007.
A comparison of antibiotic resistance in microorganisms isolated
from chicken and ostrich faeces in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe. Int. J.
Biol. Chem. Sci. 1:158–164.

Smith, J. L., D. J. V. Drum, Y. Dai, J. M. Kim, S. Sanchez, J. J.
Maurer, C. L. Hofacre, and M. D. Lee. 2007. Impact of antimicro-
bial usage on antimicrobial resistance in commensal Escherichia
coli strains colonizing broiler chickens. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
73:1404–1414.

Suleiman, A., L. Zaria, H. Grema, and P. Ahmadu. 2013. Antimi-
crobial resistant coagulase positive Staphylococcus aureus from
chickens in Maiduguri, Nigeria. Sokoto J. Vet. Sci. 11:51–55.

Tamura, K., D. Peterson, G. Stecher, M. Nei, and S. Kumar. 2011.
MEGA5: Molecular evolutionary genetics analysis using maxi-
mum likelihood, evolutionary distance, and maximum parsimony
methods. Mol. Biol. Evol. 28:2731–2739.

Van den Bogaard, A., N. London, C. Driessen, and E. Stobber-
ingh. 2001. Antibiotic resistance of faecal Escherichia coli in
poultry, poultry farmers and poultry slaughterers. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 47:763–771.

Volkmann, H., T. Schwartz, P. Bischoff, S. Kirchen, and U. Obst.
2004. Detection of clinically relevant antibiotic-resistance genes
in municipal wastewater using real-time PCR (TaqMan). J. Mi-
crobiol. Meth. 56:277–286.

Wang, Q., G. M. Garrity, J. M. Tiedje, and J. R. Cole. 2007. Na¨ıve
Bayesian classifier for rapid assignment of rRNA sequences into
the new bacterial taxonomy. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73:5261–
5267.

Weisburg, W. G., S. M. Barns, D. A. Pelletier, and D. J. Lane.
1991. 16S ribosomal DNA amplification for phylogenetic study.
J. Bacteriol. 173:697–703.

