Article — Artikel

Antimicrobial drug resistance of Escherichia coliisolated from poultry
abattoir workers at risk and broilers on antimicrobials

J W Oguttua*, C M Vearya and J A Picardb

ABSTRACT
Antimicrobial usage in food animals increases the prevalence of antimicrobial drug
resistance among their enteric bacteria. It has been suggested that this resistance can in turn
be transferred to people working with such animals, e.g. abattoir workers. Antimicrobial
drug resistance was investigated for Escherichia coli from broilers raised on feed supple-
mented with antimicrobials, and the people who carry out evisceration, washing and
packing of intestines in a high-throughput poultry abattoir in Gauteng, South Africa.
Broiler carcasses were sampled from 6 farms, on each of which broilers are produced in a
separate ‘grow-out cycle’. Per farm, 100 caeca were randomly collected 5 minutes after
slaughter and the contents of each were selectively cultured for E. coli. The minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) of each isolate was determined for the following
antimicrobials: doxycycline, trimethoprim, sulphamethoxazole, ampicillin, enrofloxacin,
fosfomycin, ceftriaxone and nalidixic acid. The same was determined for the faeces of
29 abattoir workers and 28 persons used as controls. The majority of isolates from broilers
were resistant, especially to antimicrobials that were used on the farms in the study. Overall
median MICs and the number of resistant isolates from abattoir workers (packers plus
eviscerators) tended to be higher than for the control group. However, no statistically
significant differences were observed when the median MICs of antimicrobials used
regularly in poultry and percentage resistance were compared, nor could an association
between resistance among the enteric E. coli from packers and those from broilers be
demonstrated.
Key words: abattoir workers, antimicrobial drug resistance transfer, broilers, Escherichia
coli, MICs, oral antimicrobial therapy.
Oguttu J W, Veary C M, Picard J A Antimicrobial drug resistance of Escherichia coli isolated
from poultry abattoir workers at risk and broilers on antimicrobials. Journal of the South
African Veterinary Association (2008) 79(4): 161–166. Department of Paraclinical Sciences,
Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort, 0110
South Africa.

INTRODUCTION

Collibacillosis is known to contribute
significantly to increased mortality and
economic losses in the poultry industry45.
As a result, antimicrobials, sometimes
at sub-therapeutic concentrations, are
often included in feed given to food
animals to prevent disease, reduce mor-
tality and morbidity, enhance feed con-
version efficiency and improve growth
rates2,3,10,13,15,19,22,29,39,46. However, in many
countries of the world, legislation prohib-
iting the use of especially performance
enhancers, but also certain therapeutics is
applied to an increasing number of

aDepartment of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veteri-
nary Science, University of Pretoria, Private Bag X04,
Onderstepoort, 0110 South Africa.
bDepartment of Veterinary Tropical Diseases, Faculty of
Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, Private Bag
X04, Onderstepoort, 0110 South Africa.
*Author for correspondence. Present address: College of
Agriculture and Environmental Sciences, University of
South Africa. E-mail: joguttu@unisa.ac.za
Received: May 2008. Accepted: November 2008.

antimicrobials2,4,24,40,41,45. The reasons given
are:
• there is a possibility of resistant bacterial
strains, especially zoonotic bacteria,
from food producing animals infecting
humans2,6,7,13,19, 22,25,37,43,44,47,

(cid:127) there is potential for antimicrobial drug
resistant bacteria of animals transfer-
ring resistance encoding genetic mate-
rial to bacteria that are pathogenic in
humans2,5,13,19,25,34,36,40,41,43;

(cid:127) when antimicrobials are used in an indi-
vidual, they affect not only the micro
organisms in the individual being
treated, but also other people or animals
that are in direct or indirect contact with
that individual1,17. This is usually via the
contamination of food, drinking water,
transport vehicles or the application of
manure to crops. This phenomenon has
led to antimicrobials being designated
as ‘societal drugs’1;

(cid:127) after animal handlers have picked up

resistant bacteria, they could pass them
on to the human population at large28;
and

(cid:127) there is potential for antimicrobial usage
in animals to induce cross-resistance to
antimicrobials used in human medi-
cine3,4,12,43.
When studying resistance levels of
bacteria from persons involved in animal
handling, such as abattoir workers, enteric
E. coli is considered to be the organism of
choice as a model28. This is because E. coli
strains efficiently exchange genetic material
not only with each other, but also with
other enteric pathogens such as Salmo-
nella, Yersinia and Vibrio species32. Further-
more, studies with E. coli are of particular
relevance because this species, which is
a commensal of the intestines of both
humans and animals, is a useful indicator
of the antimicrobial resistance in bacteria
in the community32. Frediani-Wolf16 cited
a study in the Netherlands that showed
that farmers who work with turkeys fed
antimicrobials as performance enhancers
are likely to carry a higher level of resistant
E. coli than their compatriots who worked
with pigs that had not been fed with these
products. A recently concluded study in
South Africa on poultry abattoir workers,
who carry out evisceration of broilers fed
feed with antimicrobials, showed that
people associated with poultry abattoirs
harbour bacteria with higher levels of
resistance than people not associated
with poultry abattoirs31.

South Africa is one of the few countries
in the world with a large intensively-
reared poultry population in which
performance enhancing as well as thera-
peutic antimicrobials are extensively
used. However, information on antibacte-
rial resistance in bacteria of poultry is
scanty in this country, with isolated studies
that rapidly become outdated owing to
changing antimicrobial treatment practices.
In these studies19,23 retail carcasses were
sampled, and it was found that 98–100 %
of isolated Salmonella were resistant to
tetracyclines. Of the staphylococci tested,
resistance to both tetracycline and
oxacillin was 39 % for retail chicken and
70 % for abattoir poultry isolates. Resistance
among the Enterobacteriaceae isolates to

0038-2809 Jl S.Afr.vet.Ass. (2008) 79(4): 161–166

161

both tetracycline and streptomycin was
34 % for retail isolates, and 60 % for
abattoir poultry isolates. It is noteworthy
that a large proportion of the bacterial
flora from fresh poultry in these studies
exhibited multiple antimicrobial drug
resistance (MAR), i.e. many isolates were
resistant to 3 or more antimicrobials. Even
the recently concluded studies by both
the South African National Veterinary
Surveillance and Monitoring Programme
for Resistance to antimicrobial Drugs37
and Oguttu31, confirm that resistance is
high among poultry isolates. In spite of
these reports and the fact that the veteri-
nary profession in South Africa is aware of
the emergence of antimicrobial resistance
(based on laboratory data) and the need
to investigate it, according to Nel and
others28,31, surveillance programmes for
antimicrobial resistance are only in their
infancy, with a veterinary surveillance
programme only recently initiated37. In
view of this, there is a need for studies on
antimicrobial drug resistance in this
country to supplement the budding
veterinary surveillance programme.

In South Africa mala (intestines) from
chickens fed performance enhancers and
possibly carrying microorganisms that
are resistant to antimicrobials are processed
(cleaned and packed) by abattoir workers
before being sold to consumers31. This
implies that abattoir workers are exposed
to potentially resistant microorganisms
during their work, and could therefore be
at risk of developing resistance among
their enteric flora31,35. It is remarkable that
this potential risk has not been exten-
sively investigated.

Since the potential risk for resistance
transfer from broilers to abattoir workers
has not been investigated extensively in
South Africa, the primary objective of this
study was to investigate whether the
prevalence of resistant enteric E. coli is
higher in abattoir workers who eviscerate,
wash and pack intestines from chickens
fed feed medicated with antimicrobials
than in people who do not work in poultry
abattoirs. To do this the level of antimi-
crobial drug resistance of isolates from
the abattoir workers whose work in-
cludes mala washing and packing was
compared with that of people not associ-
ated with the abattoir.

Given that there is a need for data on
antimicrobial drug resistance to supple-
ment the budding veterinary surveillance
programme in South Africa, this study
also sought to elucidate the occurrence of
antimicrobial resistance in commensal
E. coli isolated from broilers on a group of
farms in the Gauteng area where anti-
microbials are included in their feed or
drinking water.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Broiler specimen collection

Broiler carcasses were sampled from
6 farms from different ‘grow-out cycles’.
One hundred (n = 100) caeca were
randomly collected per farm from slaugh-
tered broilers approximately 5 minutes
after slaughter at a high throughput
poultry abattoir in South Africa. Samples
were taken at a point on the slaughter line
after the 1st inspection point, where
carcasses with defects are identified and
removed either to be condemned or to be
cut up as portions. This was to ensure that
the chickens sampled had been healthy
before slaughter and therefore fit for
human consumption.

The specimens were harvested by
aseptically incising the caeca off the rest of
the gastrointestinal tract. They were then
tied off at the open end so as to prevent
contamination. The caeca were then
placed in separate sterile plastic bags and
conveyed in an insulated polystyrene
container with frozen ice packs to the
laboratory for processing within 3 hours
of harvesting. Out of a total of 100 caeca
sampled from each farm (with the excep-
tion of the first 100 caecum samples
collected in the pilot project that were all
plated out to isolate the relevant bacteria),
25 caeca on some farms and 30 caeca on
others (depending on the time available
to complete the plating out of the speci-
men), were randomly selected from each
farm, and used to culture of E. coli. How-
ever, all 100 caeca were used for the selec-
tive culture of salmonellae that was also
investigated in the same study.

Human specimen collection

Only abattoir workers located in the
evisceration and intestine (mala) packing
areas of the abattoir were included in the
study group. Furthermore, only people in
the designated areas who had not been
on any form of antimicrobial therapy for
at least 3 months prior to sampling were
requested to provide a faecal sample. Out
of a possible 44 people, 29 volunteered
and qualified to participate in the study.
Volunteers consisting of students and
workers at the Faculty of Veterinary
Science, University of Pretoria consti-
tuted the control group. Like the experi-
mental group (abattoir workers), selec-
tion was purposive, and only people who
had not been on antimicrobials for at least
3 months prior to sampling were re-
quested to provide a sample. In addition,
people identified and selected to act as the
control group were required not to have
been in contact with or handled poultry
or animal feed during the period of
sampling or for at least 3 months prior to

sampling. Twenty-eight people agreed to
act as anonymous volunteers and com-
pleted informed consent forms before
providing a sample. It was not possible to
exclude persons who had eaten poultry
products.

Each volunteer was given a bottle with a
spoon to collect the morning stool, by
scooping off either the first or last faeces
from the anal area. No faecal sample for
submission was to be picked from the
ground or toilet. The sample bottles with
stool were brought to the company clinic
(in a cooler box with ice packs) located on
the premises of the abattoir as the volun-
teers reported for work in the morning.
The samples were then transported to the
bacteriology laboratory of the Department
of Veterinary Tropical Diseases, Faculty of
Veterinary Science, to isolate E. coli and
salmonellae.

Culture and identification ofE. coli

E. coli and salmonellae were cultured
and identified using standard methods31.
In brief, lactose fermenting colonies on
MacConkey agar (Oxoid products,
Basingstoke, UK) were purified by streak-
ing onto Columbia agar (Oxoid products,
Basingstoke, UK) containing 5 % citrated
horse blood and identified as E. coli if they
were Gram-negative bacilli, motile, fer-
mentative, oxidase-negative, catalase-
and indole-positive, citrate negative and
malonate negative. After a series of en-
richments in peptone water (Oxoid prod-
ucts, Basingstoke, UK), and selection in
Rappaport broth (Difco Laboratories,
Detroit, USA) and XLD agar (Difco Labo-
ratories, Detroit, USA) respectively, black
colonies surrounded by pink zones were
subjected to the API20S test (BioMerieux,
France) to determine whether they were
Salmonella enterica.

Selection of antimicrobials for testing

Antimicrobials selected for minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) testing
included ceftriaxone, a 3rd generation
cephalosporin and nalidixic acid, neither
of which are registered for use in poultry,
but used extensively in human medicine
in South Africa. Furthermore, nalidixic
acid was included to detect low-level
resistance to the fluoroquinolones. All
the members of the tetracyclines and
sulphonamides respectively have the
same mode of action and can therefore be
represented by 1 member of the group i.e.
doxycycline in the case of the tetra-
cyclines and sulphamethoxazole for the
sulphonamides. Although trimethoprim
is usually used in combination with a
sulphonamide, it was tested separately to
ascertain the origin of resistance to this
antimicrobial. The ampicillin and the

162

0038-2809 Tydskr.S.Afr.vet.Ver. (2008) 79(4): 161–166

slightly more lipid-soluble amoxycillin
are analogues and thus the more stable
ampicillin was used in AST as a represen-
tative of the beta-lactam antimicrobials.
Tetracyclines, amoxycillin, potentiated
sulphonamides (sulphamethoxazole and
trimethoprim), enrofloxacin and fosfo-
mycin had been used in the flocks under
study for the duration of the sampling
period.

Antimicrobial susceptibility testing

One E. coli isolate was selected from
each sample and subjected to the MIC
micro-broth dilution test as prescribed by
the Clinical and Laboratory Standards
Institute USA (CLSI)26, to determine the
susceptibility of the isolates to the above-
mentioned antimicrobials. As recom-
mended 21,26,31, pure antimicrobial powders
were used (Sigma-Aldritch, USA) and the
antimicrobial potency of each product (µg
or international units (IU)/mg) was calcu-
lated using proportional molecular weights
and percentage purity of each antimi-
crobial. The diluents chosen were those
recommended by the CLSI or by the
product manufacturers. Two-fold dilu-
tions of each antimicrobial were made in
sterile 96-well U-bottomed plates (Steri-
lab, South Africa). The minimum anti-
microbial drug concentration where
there was no visible growth of bacteria
was recorded and the isolate determined
as either susceptible or resistant based on
microbiological cut-off concentrations
used by the CLSI26. In the case of drugs for
which CLSI does not provide the cut-off
point, figures from the Swedish and
Spanish surveillance programmes were
used38,42. The reference points used were:
ampicillin 1 mg/ , ceftriaxone, 1 mg/ ,
doxycycline 8 mg/ , enrofloxacin 0.25 mg/ ,
nalidixic acid 8 mg/ , fosfomycin 16 mg/ ,
sulphamethoxazole 256 mg/
and
trimethoprim 8 mg/ .

Data analysis

Recorded data were analysed by the
statistical package Stata 8.2 (StataCorp,
College station, TX, USA). A P-value <
0.05 was considered to be statistically sig-
nificant.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Isolates

Not all samples yielded an isolate and
in such cases no attempt was made to
re-culture them. The number of E. coli
cultured is summarised in Table 1, and
included 168 from broilers, 28 from abat-
toir workers and 26 from the control
group. As the farms used in the study had
an intensive salmonella eradication
programme, no salmonellae were isolated.

Table 1: Number of Escherichiacoliselected
for MIC testing from the different popula-
tions sampled.

Source

Number of isolates

Broilers
Abattoir workers
Control group

168
28
26

This means that these farms were able to
control salmonellae, but this is not true of
the national flock, where salmonellae are
routinely isolated37.

The majority of the E. coli isolates from
broilers had MIC values that were consid-
ered to indicate resistance to doxycycline
(98.2 %), sulphamethoxazole (78.7 %),
ampicillin (75 %), enrofloxacin (75.6 %)
fosfomycin (98.2 %) and nalidixic acid
(90.5 %). All with the exception of
nalidixic acid were administered orally to
the flocks studied either as feed additives
or for prophylactic purposes. These levels
of resistance were anticipated given that
use of antimicrobials as feed additives
in animals is known to lead to develop-
ment of resistance among enteric organ-
isms from such animals. These findings
are consistent with previous and recent
studies that reported a high level of resis-
tance among isolates from broilers in
South Africa19,23,37.

A single mutation in the quinolone
resistance-determining region (QRDR) of
the topoisomerase gene gyrA (commonly
at positions 83 and 87) usually leads to
resistance against nalidixic acid, a non-
fluorinated narrow-spectrum quinolone
and to decreased fluoroquinolone suscep-
tibility among Gram-negative bacteria,
e.g. Salmonella and E. coli, whereas 2 or
more mutations in gyrA or parC lead
to high resistance to the fluoroquino-
lones14,33,34. It is therefore expected that
resistance to nalidixic acid would be
higher than that of enrofloxacin. The high
level of resistance to enrofloxacin is not
considered unusual in South Africa. In
fact a study by SANVAD37 confirms that
resistance to enrofloxacin among healthy
broiler isolates in South Africa is high
(65.2 %). This is possibly not only due to
the use of enrofloxacin but also as a result
of cross-resistance when other fluoro-
quinolones such as norfloxacin are used.
The prevalence of resistance to ceftria-
xone (39.3 %), although low compared
with what was observed for other anti-
microbials among broiler isolates, was
unexpected. However, cephalosporin
resistance among avian E. coli isolates has
been reported previously44. It is postu-
lated that exposure of E. coli to low levels
of tetracycline induces an expression of
genetic loci that regulates susceptibility to

cephalosporins, penicillin, chloram-
phenicol, tetracycline, nalidixic acid and
fluoroquinolones27. Since the flocks
sampled had been on tetracycline at the
time of sampling, this could account
for the level of resistance observed to
ceftriaxone (a cephalosporin) even
though the isolates tested had not been
exposed to these antimicrobials at the
time. Furthermore, it is known that muta-
tions in marR of the marRAB operon lead
to multiple-antibiotic resistance among
E. coli isolates14. The primary cause of
resistance in a large number of Gram-
negative bacilli like E. coli is the ability to
generate Extended-Spectrum Beta-Lacta-
mase (ESBL) enzymes that can inactivate
the penicillin and cephalosporin class
antibiotics. In addition, this type of resis-
tance is known to manifest rapidly27. It is
therefore also possible that these E. coli
isolates exhibit ESBL. This resistance to
ceftriaxone could also be attributed to
cross resistance with amoxycillin, a
β-lactam to which the isolates were ex-
posed.

Since broilers only live for 35–42 days
and the farms sampled, according to the
questionnaire completed, practise an all-
in all-out system of rearing, with poultry
houses thoroughly cleaned, washed and
disinfected before new batches of broilers
are brought into the poultry houses, the
high level of resistance observed here
demonstrates the ability of bacteria to
develop resistance quickly or the ability of
a few resistant bacteria that survive to
quickly re-populate the flock when ex-
posed to antimicrobial selection pressure.
A study of Campylobacter in the USA
showed that chickens naturally colonised
with fluoroquinolone-susceptible strains
began excreting resistant strains after
2 days of doses of enrofloxacin, a drug
commonly used for prophylaxis and
treatment in the poultry industry20. In
another study cited by Gouws and
Brözel19, it was demonstrated that all
Enterobacteriaceae from chickens fed
with tetracycline-treated feed developed
resistance within 36 to 48 hours. Within
3 months, resistance to tetracycline ob-
served in the cited study was accompa-
nied by resistance to ampicillin, carbeni-
cillin and sulphonamides. This multiple
resistance was subsequently accompa-
nied by an increased ability of these strains
to transfer tetracycline resistance.

With the exception of trimethoprim, it is
clear that the prevalence of resistance
among the broilers is much higher than
that observed among the isolates from
the 2 human populations that were
sampled (Fig. 1). This could be attributed
to the fact that the conditions of antimi-
crobial usage in farm animals favour the

0038-2809 Jl S.Afr.vet.Ass. (2008) 79(4): 161–166

163

Fig. 1: Percentage resistance of Escherichiacolifrom broilers (n= 168), packers (n= 28) and human controls (n= 26) to antimicrobial drugs
tested in this study.

development of resistance in comparison
to the situation in humans15.

Figure 1 also shows that the level of
resistance tended to be higher among
abattoir workers (with the exception of
enrofloxacin) than in the control group.
This supports the suggestion that people
working with animals fed feed with
antimicrobial additives tend to have a
higher level of resistance to such antimi-
crobials than those who do not28,40. How-
ever, statistical analysis using the Wilcoxin
rank-sum test showed no significant
differences between abattoir workers and
the control group for all the antimicrobials
(P > 0.05). Notwithstanding these find-
ings, with the exception of ceftriaxone, to
which 3.9 % E. coli isolates from the control
group had MICs considered resistant,
resistance among E. coli isolates from the
2 human populations tested could still be
described as being very high or similar to
what it was in Europe before the use of
feed growth enhancers was abolished8,9,43.
However, the levels of resistance observed
here are much lower than in countries
where antimicrobials are easily accessible
and are available over the counter. For
example, in Nigeria a prevalence of up to
90 % resistance to tetracycline among
human isolates has been recorded30. This
could be attributed to the less stringent
regulatory mechanisms in such countries
compared with South Africa, where anti-
microbials are not easily accessible over
the counter for use in human medicine.

164

The difference in the number of E. coli
isolates with MICs above the cut-off point
for fosfomycin between the workers
(46.6 %) and the control group (34.6 %)
was not significant (P = 0.418) (Fig. 1). In
South Africa, fosfomycin trometamol
(Urizone, Adcock Ingram (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa) is only occasionally used for the
treatment of cystitis in humans, so the
finding was unusual. It was anticipated
that abattoir workers by virtue of their
closeness to poultry isolates with a high
level of resistance, would carry a higher
level of resistance due to resistance trans-
fer than the control group. However, re-
sistance in this phosphoenol pyruvate
analogue can be conferred by the trans-
missible phosA gene. In a study in England
where fosfomycin is not used it was
found that this gene was present in E. coli
isolates from urinary tract infections of
humans as well as bacteria isolated from
animal products from Spain, a country
that uses this antimicrobial18. It was there-
fore proposed that fosfomycin resistance
originates from eating animal products.
The same may be true for this study given
that it was not possible to exclude persons
who were eating poultry products and
that fosfomycin is widely used as a feed
additive in South African poultry flocks.
The numbers of E. coli isolates from the
abattoir workers with median MIC values
above the cut-off point were lower than
was observed for poultry isolates for the
following antimicrobials: doxycycline

(P < 0.001), enrofloxacin (P < 0.001),
fosfomycin (P < 0.001), ceftriaxone (P =
0.003) and nalidixic acid (P < 0.001). For
trimethoprim (P = 1.00), sulphamethox-
azole (P = 0.228) and ampicillin (P =
0.350), no significant differences were
observed when the median MIC values
were compared. The former group con-
sisted of antimicrobials extensively used
in poultry and for which the antimicrobial
selection pressure would be greater in
broilers than in humans.

As expected, E. coli isolates from people
not associated with the abattoir (control
group), likewise had lower median MICs
than broiler isolates. Significant differ-
ences were observed for doxycycline (P <
0.001), sulphamethoxazole (P < 0.001),
ampicillin (P = 0.002), enrofloxacin (P <
0.001), fosfomycin (P < 0.001), ceftriaxone
(P < 0.001), and nalidixic acid (P < 0.001).
The exception was trimethoprim (P =
0.654) for which a level of percentage
resistance close to that observed among
E. coli isolates from poultry was recorded.
This is attributed to the fact that selection
pressure for resistance to the antimicro-
bials tested (with the exception of trime-
thoprim) is highest among poultry
isolates.

Since the packers have a higher expo-
sure to enteric bacteria from poultry, it
was decided to compare the median MICs
of the E. coli originating from the packers
to that of the eviscerators. Even though
the packers did have slightly higher

0038-2809 Tydskr.S.Afr.vet.Ver. (2008) 79(4): 161–166

exclusively in poultry. However, since
people in South Africa eat large quantities
of poultry meat and eggs, the possibility
that these products are sources of resis-
tant bacteria and/or antibiotic residues for
the human population should be further
investigated.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to thank Professor
Peter Thompson for the statistical analysis
and Ms Janita Greyling for her assistance
in the laboratory.

REFERENCES
1. Aarestrup F M 2000 Characterisation of
glycopeptide-resistant Enterococcus faecium
(GRE) from broilers and pigs in Denmark:
Genetic evidence that persistence of GRE in
pig herds is associated with co-selection by
resistance to macrolides. Journal of Clinical
Microbiology 38: 2774–2777

2. Aarestrup F M, Seyforth A M, Emborg H D,
Pedersen K, Hendriksen R, Bager F 2001
Effect of abolishment of the use of anti-
microbial agents for growth promotion on
occurrence of antimicrobial resistance in
faecal enterococci from food animals in
Denmark. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemo-
therapy 45: 2054–2059

3. American College of Physicians 2001
Antimicrobial resistance from drug use in
livestock: FDA’S approach to Risk Manage-
ment. Online at: http://www.acponline.
org/ear/vas2001/livestock.htm (accessed 15
May 2008)

4. Anderson A D, Nelson J M, Rossiter S,
Angulo F J 2003 Public health conse-
quences of use of antimicrobial agents in
food animals in the United States. Microbial
Drug Resistance 9: 373–379

5. Anonymous 1984 Animal Diseases Act No
35. Online at: http://www.nda.agric.za/
vetweb/Regulate/R_Animal_Diseases_Act_
No_35.htm (accessed 15 May 2008)

6. Antunes P, Ren C, Sousa J C, Peixe L, Pestana
N 2002 Incidence of Salmonella from poultry
products and their susceptibility to anti-
microbial agents. International Journal of
Food Microbiology Agents 82: 97–103

7. Bager F, Aarestrup F M, Madsen M,
Wegener H C 1999 Glycopeptide resistance
in Enterococcus faecium from broilers and
pigs following discontinued use of Avo-
parcin. Microbiology Drug Resistance 5: 53–56
8. Bates J 1997 Epidemiology of vancomycin-
resistant enterococci in the community and
the relevance of farm animals to human
infection. Journal of Hospital Infection 37:
89–101

9. Bonten M J M, Willems R, Weinstein R A
2001 Vancomycin-resistant enterococci:
why are they here, and where do they come
from? Infectious Diseases 1: 314–325

10. Bren L 2001 Antimicrobial resistance from
down on the chicken farm. FDA Consumer
35: 10–11

11. CDC 2002 Outbreak of multidrug resistant
Salmonella Newport – United States. Mor-
bidity and Mortality Weekly Report 51:
545–548. Online at: http://www.cdc.gov/
mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5125a1.
htm (accessed 15 May 2008)

12. Chen H Y, Robert L R H, Kirk M, Casewell
M W, Beigton D 2002 Differential antimicro-
bial susceptibility between human and
chicken isolates of vancomycin resistance

Fig. 2: Scatter plot for percentage resistant isolates from packers and broilers for each
antimicrobial drug. 3 = Doxycycline; 4 = trimethoprim; 5 = sulphamethoxazole; 6 =
ampicillin; 8 = enrofloxacin; 10 = fosfomycin; 11 = ceftriaxone and 12 = nalidixic acid.

median MICs than the eviscerators, statis-
tically significant higher values were only
detected for trimethoprim (P = 0.002),
ampicillin (P = 0.041) and lower values in
the case of nalidixic acid (P = 0.022).
Significant differences between the pack-
ers and control groups were also observed
for trimethoprim (P = 0.012) and ampi-
cillin (P = 0.036). However, higher median
MICs were recorded for the E. coli isolates
from the control group compared to the
packers for doxycycline, fosfomycin and
the fluoroquinolone early resistance
indicator, nalidixic acid. As the last 3
classes are more commonly used in
poultry, the results were contrary to what
was expected. It appears that the packers
are not more likely to carry more resistant
genes than the eviscerators.

The rank correlation coefficient was
determined for isolates from the packers
and the broilers. The existence of significant
levels of resistance transfer between the
2 populations could have been suggested
if most of the drugs (represented by
numbers in Fig. 2) lay close to the diagonal
line through the graph. However, as
demonstrated by the scatter plot percent-
age on the graph in Fig. 2, no correlation
(Spearman’s r = 0.21, P = 0.62) was ob-
served between E. coli isolates from 2
populations. This implies that resistance
transfer from animals to humans was not
occurring at statistically significant levels
in this poultry abattoir.

CONCLUSIONS

Broilers sampled carried an exception-
ally high level of resistance to antimicro-
bials frequently used in poultry, namely
tetracyclines, fluoroquinolones, penicil-
lins, fosfomycin and sulphonamides,
which might reflect what could be hap-
pening in the Gram-negative enteric pop-
ulation of bacteria of the national broiler

flocks. In view of this, it is recommended
that the South African National Veteri-
nary Surveillance and Monitoring pro-
gramme for resistance to Antimicrobial
Drugs (SANVAD) receive the full support
of government, veterinarians and the
farming community to be able to establish
trends in antimicrobial drug resistance in
this country. The importance of this is
appreciated when consideration is given
to the fact that emergence of antimi-
crobial resistance phenotypes among
food-borne bacteria11,44 implies the likeli-
hood of failure of empiric treatment of
food-associated diseases11.

In view of this, it is recommended that
the poultry industry and in particular the
farms in this study adopt a prudent anti-
microbial usage policy or even consider
moving to a high health status with mini-
mum antimicrobial usage. The latter
programme has been successful in some
European countries where there was no
marked loss in production2,4,19,46,47. Fur-
thermore, it is recommended that all
antimicrobials for use in poultry become
prescription drugs and that poultry farms
base any treatments on antimicrobial
susceptibility tests.

While these results confirmed that
abattoir workers generally carried higher
levels of resistance, statistical analysis did
not show significant differences in the
level of resistance between the 2 human
populations (abattoir workers and control
group) studied for any of the antimicrobials
commonly used for poultry health and
production. This implies that high levels
of antimicrobial resistance are as a result
of both animal and human antimicrobial
drug usage and that cross-resistance
could be a common event.

The unexpectedly high levels of fosfo-
mycin resistance in humans is of concern
because this product is being used almost

0038-2809 Jl S.Afr.vet.Ass. (2008) 79(4): 161–166

165

and sensitive Enterococcus faecium. Interna-
tional Journal of Antimicrobial Agents 19:
39–46

13. Collignon P J 1999 Vancomycin resistant
enterococci and use of avoparcin in animal
feed: is there a link? Medical Journal of
Australia 171: 144–146

14. Everette M J, Jin F Y, Ricci V, Piddock L J 1996
Contribution of individual mechanism to
fluoroquinolone resistance in 36 Escherichia
coli strains isolated from humans and ani-
mals. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy
40: 2380–2386

15. Florea N F, Nightingale C H 2004 Review of
the pharmaco-dynamics of antimicrobial
use in animal food production. Diagnostic
Microbiology and Infectious Disease 49:
105–108

16 Frediani-Wolf, V R S 2003 Resistance pat-
terns of Campylobacter spp. strains isolated
from poultry carcasses in a big Swiss poul-
try slaughterhouse. International Journal of
Food Microbiology 89: 233–240

17. Freeman A 1970 The Swann Report. Journal
of American Veterinary Medical Association
157: 13–16

18. Gray K J, Gascoyne-Binzi D M, Nicholson P,
Heritage J, Hawkey P M 2001 Transmissible
fosfomycin resistance markers in urinary
isolates and imported foodstuffs in the UK
during 1994 and 1995.
Journal of
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 48: 744–745

19. Gouws P A, Brözel V S 2000 Antimicrobial
resistance of Salmonella isolates associated
with retail chicken and poultry abattoir.
South African Journal of Science 96: 254–256

20. Iovine N M, Blaser M J 2004 Antimicrobials
in animal feed and spread of resistant
Campylobacter from poultry to humans.
Emerging Infectious Diseases: 10: 1158–1159.
Online at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/
EID/vol10no6/04-0403.htm (accessed 15
May 2008)

21. ISO 2006 Clinical laboratory testing and in
vitro diagnostic test systems – susceptibility
testing of infectious agents and evaluation
of performance antimicrobial susceptibility
devices. International Standard ISO/FDIS
20776 – 1

22. Lees P, Aliabadi F S 2002 Rational dosing of
antimicrobial drugs: animals versus hu-
mans. International Journal of Antimicrobial
Agents 19: 269–284

23. Manie T, Khan S, Brozel V S, Veith W J,
Gouws P A 1998 Antimicrobial resistance of
bacteria isolated from slaughtered and
retail chickens in South Africa. Letters in
Applied Microbiology 26: 253–258

24. Mayrhofer S, Paulsen P, Smulders F J M,
Hilbert F 2004 Antimicrobial resistance
profile of five major food borne pathogens
isolated from beef, pork and poultry: Inter-
national Journal of Food Microbiology 97: 23–29
25. McCormick J B 1998 Epidemiology of
emerging/re-emerging antimicrobial resis-
tant bacterial pathogens. Current Opinions
in Microbiology 1: 125–129

26. NCCLS 1994 Performance Standards for
Antimicrobial Disk and Dilution Susceptibility
Tests for Bacteria Isolated from Animals: Pro-
posed Standard. NCCL document M31-P
(ISBN 1-56238-258-6). NCCLS, 771 East
Lancaster Avenue, Villanova, Pennsylvania
1985

27. Neely A N, Holder I A 1999 Antimicrobial

resistance. Burns 25: 17–24

28. Nel H 2002 The establishment and stan-
dardization of a veterinary antimicrobial
resistance surveillance program in South
Africa. MSc dissertation, University of
Pretoria

29. North M O, Bell D D 1990 Commercial chicken
production manual (4th edn). Van Nostrand
Reinhold, New York

30. Nys S, Okeke I N, Kariuki S, Dinant G J,
Driessen C, Stobberingh E E 2004 Anti-
microbial resistance of faecal Escherichia
coli from healthy volunteers from eight
developing countries. Journal of Antimicro-
bial Chemotherapy 54: 952–955

31. Oguttu J W 2007 Occurrence of antimicro-
bial drug resistance among broiler isolates
fed antimicrobial growth promoters and
exposed poultry abattoir workers. MSc dis-
sertation, University of Pretoria

32. Okeke I N, Fayinka S T, Lamikanra A 2000
Antimicrobial resistance in Escherichia coli
from Nigerian students, 1986–1998. CDC:
Emerging Infectious Diseases 6: 393–396.
Online at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/eid/
vol6no4/okeke.htm (accessed 15 May 2008)
33. Ouabdesselam S, Tankovic J, Soussy C J
1996 Quinolone resistance mutations in the
gyrA gene of clinical isolates of Salmonella.
Microbial Drug Resistance 2: 299–302

34. Piddock L J, Ricci V, McLaren I, Griggs D J
1998 Role of mutation in the gyrA and parC
genes of nalidixic-acid-resistant salmonella
serotypes isolated from animals in the
United Kingdom. Journal of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy 41: 635–641

35. Prescott J F 1999 Antimicrobial therapy. In
Hirsh D C, Zee Y C (eds) Veterinary microbiol-
ogy. Blackwell Science, Malden, MA: 28–45
36. Salisbury J G, Nicholls T J, Lammerding
A M, Turnidge J, Nunn M J 2002 A risk

analysis framework for the long-term
management of antimicrobial resistance in
food–producing animals. International
Journal of Antimicrobial Agents 20: 153–164

37. SANVAD 2007 South African National Veteri-
nary Surveillance and Monitoring Programme
for Resistance to Antimicrobial Drugs. Pretoria
38. SAVRM 2006 Swedish Veterinary Antimi-
crobial Resistance Monitoring. The National
Veterinary Institute (SVA), Uppsala, Sweden.
Onlineat: http://www.sva.se (accessed 14
May 2008)

39. Ungemach F R, Müller-Bahrdt D, Abraham
G 2006 Guidelines for prudent use of anti-
microbials and their implications on anti-
microbial usage in veterinary medicine.
International Journal of Medical Microbiology
296: 33–38

40. Van den Bogaard A E, Stobberingh E E 2000
Epidemiology of resistance to antimicrobials:
link between animals and humans. Interna-
tional Journal of Antimicrobial Agents 14:
327–335

41. Van Immerseel F, De Buck J, Pasmans F,
Huyghebaert G, Haesebrouck F, Ducatelle
R 2004 Clostridium perfringens in poultry: an
emerging threat for animal and public
health. Avian Pathology 33: 537–549

42. VAV 2005 Veterinary monitoring of anti-
microbial resistance in Spain, 12th report. On-
line at: http://www.vigilanciasanitaria.es/
data/VAV2005.pdf (accessed 29 April 2008)
43. Wegener H C, Aarestrup F M, Jensen L B,
Hammerum A M, Bager F 1999 Use of
antimicrobial growth promoters in food
animals and Enterococcus faecium resistance
to therapeutic antimicrobial drugs in
Europe. Emerging Infectious Diseases 5: 329–
335

44. White D G, Zhao S, Simjee S, Wagner D D,
McDermott P F 2002 Antimicrobial resis-
tance of food borne pathogens. Microbes and
Infection 4: 405–412

45. White D G, Piddock L J V, Maurer J J, Zhao S,
Ricci V, Thayer S G 2000 Characterization of
fluoroquinolone resistance among veteri-
nary isolates of avian Escherichia coli. Anti-
micro bial Agents and Chemotherapy 44: 2897–
2899

46. Wierup M 2001 The experience of reducing
antimicrobials used in animal production
in the Nordic countries. International Journal
of Antimicrobial Agents 18: 287–290

47. Williams S 2005 Antimicrobial resistance:
not just for people anymore. Journal of
Young Investigators 6. Online at: http://
www.jyi.org/features/ft.php?id=524 (ac-
cessed 4 August 2006)

166

0038-2809 Tydskr.S.Afr.vet.Ver. (2008) 79(4): 161–166

